The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Fortune Hunter, by Louis Joseph Vance

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Fortune Hunter

Author: Louis Joseph Vance

Illustrator: Arthur William Brown

Posting Date: November 15, 2011 [EBook #9747]
Release Date: January, 2006
First Posted: October 15, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FORTUNE HUNTER ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Anuradha Valsa Raj, Tonya Allen
and PG Distributed Proofreaders











[Illustration: "You can be worth a million ... within a year"]


THE FORTUNE HUNTER

By

Louis Joseph Vance

Author Of "The Brass Bowl,"
"The Bronze Bell," Etc.

_With illustrations by_
Arthur William Brown

1910


To
George Spellvin, Esq.,

_This book is cheerfully dedicated_


CONTENTS

CHAPTER


I.       FROM HIM THAT HATH NOT

II.      TO HIM THAT HATH

III.     INSPIRATION

IV.      TRIUMPH OF MR. HOMER LITTLE JOHN

V.       MARGARET'S DAUGHTER

VI.      INTRODUCTION TO MISS CARPENTER

VII.     A WINDOW IN RADVILLE

VIII.    THE MAN OF BUSINESS IN EMBRYO

IX.      SMALL BEGINNINGS

X.       ROLAND BARNETTE'S FRIEND

XI.      BLINKY LOCKWOOD

XII.     DUNCAN'S GRUBSTAKE

XIII.    THE BUSINESS MAN AND MR. BURNHAM
 XIV.     MOSTLY ABOUT BETTY

XV.      MANOEUVRES OF JOSIE

XVI.     WHERE RADVILLE FEARED TO TREAD

XVII.    TRACEY'S TROUBLES

XVIII.   A BARGAIN IS A BARGAIN

XIX.     PROVING THE PERSIPICUITY OF MR. KELLOGG

XX.      ROLAND SHOWS HIS HAND

XXI.     AS OTHERS SAW HIM

XXII.    ROLAND'S TRIUMPH

XXIII.   THE RAINBOW'S END


ILLUSTRATIONS

"You can be worth a million ... within a year"

"You mean you're going to work here?"

"Four hundred dollars, Mr. Sheriff"

"Betty!"

"You're a thief with a reward out for you"

"Forever and ever and a day"




I


FROM HIM THAT HATH NOT

Receiver at ear, Spaulding, of Messrs. Atwater & Spaulding, importers
of motoring garments and accessories, listened to the switchboard
operator's announcement with grave attention, acknowledging it with a
toneless: "All right. Send him in." Then hooking up the desk telephone
he swung round in his chair to face the door of his private office, and
in a brief ensuing interval painstakingly ironed out of his face and
attitude every indication of the frame of mind in which he awaited his
caller. It was, as a matter of fact, anything but a pleasant one: he
had a distasteful duty to perform; but that was the last thing he
designed to become evident. Like most good business men he nursed a pet
superstition or two, and of the number of these the first was that he
must in all his dealings present an inscrutable front, like a
poker-player's: captains of industry were uniformly like that,
Spaulding understood; if they entertained emotions it was strictly in
private. Accordingly he armoured himself with a magnificent
imperturbability which at times almost deceived its wearer.

Occasionally it deceived others: notably now it bewildered Duncan as he
entered on the echo of Spaulding's "Come!" He had apprehended the
visage of a thunderstorm, with a rattle of brusque complaints: he
encountered Spaulding as he had always seemed: a little, urbane figure
with a blank face, the blanker for glasses whose lenses seemed always
to catch the light and, glaring, mask the eyes behind them; a
prosperous man of affairs, well groomed both as to body and as to mind;
a machine for the transaction of business, with all a machine's
vivacity and temperamental responsiveness. It was just that quality in
him that Duncan envied, who was vaguely impressed that, if he himself
could only imitate, however minutely, the phlegm of a machine, he might
learn to ape something of its efficiency and so, ultimately, prove
himself of some worth to the world--and, incidentally, to Nathaniel
Duncan. Thus far his spasmodic attempts to adapt to the requirements
and limitations of the world of business his own equipment of misfit
inclinations and ill-assorted abilities, had unanimously turned out
signal failures. So he envied Spaulding without particularly admiring
him.

Now the sight of his employer, professionally bland and capable, and
with no animus to be discerned in his attitude, provided Duncan with
one brief, evanescent flash of hope, one last expiring instant of
dignity (tempered by his unquenchable humour) in which to face his
fate. Something of the hang-dog vanished from his habit and for a
little time he carried himself again with all his one-time grace and
confidence.

"Good-afternoon, Mr. Spaulding," he said, replying to a nod as he
dropped into the chair that nod had indicated. A faint smile lightened
his expression and made it quite engaging.

"G'dafternoon." Spaulding surveyed him swiftly, then laced his fat
little fingers and contemplated them with detached intentness. "Just
get in, Duncan?"

"On the three-thirty from Chicago...."

There was a pause, during which Spaulding reviewed his fingernails with
impartial interest; in that pause Duncan's poor little hope died a
natural death. "I got your wire," he resumed; "I mean, it got
me--overtook me at Minneapolis.... So here I am."

"You haven't wasted time."

"I fancied the matter might be urgent, sir."

Spaulding lifted his brows ever so slightly. "Why?"

"Well, I gathered from the fact that you wired
me to come home that you wanted my advice."

A second time Spaulding gestured with his eyebrows, for once fairly
surprised out of his pose. "_Your_ advice!..."

"Yes," said Duncan evenly: "as to whether you ought to give up your
customers on my route or send them a man who could sell goods."

"Well...." Spaulding admitted.

"Oh, don't think I'm boasting of my acuteness: anybody could have
guessed as much from the great number of heavy orders I have not been
sending you."

"You've had bad luck...."

"You mean you have, Mr. Spaulding. It was good luck for me to be
drawing down my weekly cheques, bad luck to you not to have a man who
could earn them."

His desperate honesty touched Spaulding a trifle; at the risk of not
seeming a business man to himself he inclined dubiously to relent, to
give Duncan another chance. The fellow was likeable enough, his
employer considered; he had good humour and even in dejection,
distinction; whatever he was not, he was a man of birth and breeding.
His face might be rusty with a day-old stubble, as it was; his
shirt-cuffs frayed, his shoes down at the heel, his baggy clothing
weirdly ready-made, as they were: there remained his air. You'd think
he might amount to something, to somewhat more than a mere something,
given half a chance in the right direction. Then what?... Spaulding
sought from Duncan elucidation of this riddle.

"Duncan," he said, "what's the trouble?"

"I thought you knew that; I thought that was
why you called me in with my route half-covered."

"You mean--?"

"I mean I can't sell your line."

"Why?"

"God only knows. I want to, badly enough. It's just general
incompetence, I presume."

"What makes you think that?"

Duncan smiled bitterly. "Experience," he said.

"You've tried--what else?"

"A little of everything--all the jobs open to a man with a knowledge of
Latin and Greek and the higher mathematics: shipping clerk,
time-keeper, cashier--all of 'em."

"And yet Kellogg believes in you."

Duncan nodded dolefully. "Harry's a good friend. We roomed together at
college. That's why he stands for me."

"He says you only need the right opening--."

"And nobody knows where that is, except my unfortunate employers: it's
the back door going out, for mine every time.... Oh, Harry's been a
prince to me. He's found me four or five jobs with friends of his--like
yourself. But I don't seem to last. You see I was brought up to be
ornamental and irregular rather than useful; to blow about in motor
cars and keep a valet busy sixteen hours a day--and all that sort of
thing. My father's failure--you know about that?"

Spaulding nodded. Duncan went on gloomily, talking a great deal more
freely than he would at any other time--suffering, in fact, from that
species of auto hypnosis induced by the sound of his own voice
recounting his misfortunes, which seems especially to affect a man down
on his luck.

"That smash came when I was five years out of college--I'd never
thought of turning my hand to anything in all that time. I'd always had
more coin than I could spend--never had to consider the worth of money
or how hard it is to earn: my father saw to all that. He seemed not to
want me to work: not that I hold that against him; he'd an idea I'd
turn out a genius of some sort or other, I believe.... Well, he failed
and died all in a week, and I found myself left with an extensive
wardrobe, expensive tastes, an impractical education--and not so much
of that that you'd notice it--and not a cent.... I was too proud to
look to my friends for help in those days--and perhaps that was as
well; I sought jobs on my own.... Did you ever keep books in a
fish-market?"

"No." Spaulding's eyes twinkled behind his large, shiny glasses.

"But what's the use of my boring you?" Duncan made as if to rise,
suddenly remembering himself.

"You're not. Go on."

"I didn't mean to; mostly, I presume, I've been blundering round an
explanation of Kellogg's kindness to me, in my usual ineffectual
way--felt somehow an explanation was due you, as the latest to suffer
through his misplaced interest in me."

"Perhaps," said Spaulding, "I am beginning to understand. Go on: I'm
interested. About the fish-market?"

"Oh, I just happened to think of it as a sample experience--and the
last of that particular brand. I got nine dollars a week and earned
every cent of it inhaling the atmosphere. My board cost me six and the
other three afforded me a chance to demonstrate myself a captain of
finance--paying laundry bills and clothing myself, besides buying
lunches and such-like small matters. I did the whole thing, you
know--one schooner of beer a day and made my own cigarettes: never
could make up my mind which was the worst. The hours were easy, too:
didn't have to get to work until five in the morning.... I lasted five
weeks at that job, before I was taken sick: shows what a great
constitution I've got."

He laughed uncertainly and paused, thoughtful, his eyes vacant, fixed
upon the retrospect that was a grim prospect of the imminent future.

"And then--?"

"Oh--?" Duncan roused. "Why, then I fell in with Kellogg again; he
found me trying the open-air cure on a bench in Washington Square.
Since then he's been finding me one berth after another. He's a
sure-enough optimist."

Spaulding shifted uneasily in his chair, stirred by an impulse whose
unwisdom he could not doubt. Duncan had assuredly done his case no good
by painting his shortcomings in colours so vivid; yet, somehow
strangely, Spaulding liked him the better for his open-hearted
confession.

"Well...." Spaulding stumbled awkwardly.

"Yes; of course," said Duncan promptly, rising. "Sorry if I tired you."

"What do you mean by: 'Yes, of course'?"

"That you called me in to fire me--and so that's over with. Only I'd be
sorry to have you sore on Kellogg for saddling me on you. You see, he
believed I'd make good, and so did I in a way: at least, I hoped to."

"Oh, that's all right," said Spaulding uncomfortably. "The trouble is,
you see, we've nothing else open just now. But if you'd really like
another chance on the road, I--I'll be glad to speak to Mr. Atwater
about it."

"Don't you do it!" Duncan counselled him sharply, aghast. "He might say
yes. And I simply couldn't accept; it wouldn't be fair to you, Kellogg,
or myself. It'd be charity--for I've proved I can't earn my wages; and
I haven't come to that yet. No!" he concluded with determination, and
picked up his hat.

"Just a minute." Spaulding held him with a gesture. "You're forgetting
something: at least I am. There's a month's pay coming to you; the
cashier will hand you the cheque as you go out."

"A month's pay?" Duncan said blankly. "How's that? I've drawn up to the
end of this week already, if you didn't know it."

"Of course I knew it. But we never let our men go without a month's
notice or its equivalent, and--"

"No," Duncan interrupted firmly. "No; but thank you just the same. I
couldn't. I really couldn't. It's good of you, but ... Now," he broke
off abruptly, "I've left my accounts--what there is of them--with the
book-keeping department, and the checks for my sample trunks. There'll
be a few dollars coming to me on my expense account, and I'll send you
my address as soon as I get one."

"But look here--" Spaulding got to his feet, frowning.

"No," reiterated Duncan positively. "There's no use. I'm grateful to
you for your toleration of me--and all that. But we can't do anything
better now than call it all off. Good-bye, Mr. Spaulding."

Spaulding nodded, accepting defeat with the better grace because of an
innate conviction that it was just as well, after all. And,
furthermore, he admired Duncan's stand. So he offered his hand: an
unusual condescension. "You'll make good somewhere yet," he asserted.

"I wish I could believe it." Duncan's grasp was firm since he felt more
assured of some humanity latent in his late employer. "However ...
Good-bye."

"Good luck to you," rang in his ears as the door put a period to the
interview. He stopped and took up the battered suitcase and rusty
overcoat which he had left outside the junior partner's office, then
went on, shaking his head. "Much obliged," he said huskily to himself.
"But what's the good of that. There's no room anywhere for a
professional failure. And that's what I am; just a ne'er-do-well. I
never realised what that meant, really, before, and it's certainly
taken me a damn' long time to find out. But I know now, all right...."

Outside, on the steps of the building, he paused a moment, fascinated
by the brisk spectacle afforded by lower Broadway at the hour when the
cave-like offices in its cliff-like walls begin to empty themselves,
when the overlords and their lieutenants close their desks and turn
their faces homewards, leaving the details of the day's routine to be
wound up by underlings. In the clear light of the late spring afternoon
a stream of humanity was high and fluent upon the sidewalks. Duncan had
glimpses of keen-faced men, bright-faced women, eager boys, quickened
all by that manner of efficiency and intelligence which seems so
integrally American. A well-dressed throng, well-fed, amiable and
animated, looking ever forward, the resistless tide of affairs that
gave it being bore it onward; it passed the onlooker as a strong
current passes flotsam in a back-eddy, with no pause, no turning aside.
Acutely he felt his aloofness from it, who had no part in its interests
and scarcely any comprehension of them. The sunken look, the leanness
of his young face, seemed suddenly accentuated; the gloom in his
discontented eyes deepened; his slight habitual stoop became more
noticeable. And a second time he nodded acquiescence to his unspoken
thought.

"There," said he, singling out a passer-by upon whose complacent
features prosperity had set its smug hall-mark--"there, but for the
grace of God, goes Nat Duncan!" He rolled the paraphrase upon his
tongue and found it bitter--not, however, with a tonic bitterness.
"Lord, what a worthless critter I am! No good to myself--nor to anybody
else. Even on Harry I'm a drag--a regular old man of the mountains!"

Despondently he went down to the sidewalk and merged himself with the
crowd, moving with it though a thousand miles apart from it, and
presently diverging, struck across-town toward the Worth Street subway
station.

"And the worst of it is, he's too sharp not to find it out--if he
hasn't by this time--and too damn' decent by far to let me know if he
has! ... It can't go on this way with us: I can't let him ... Got to
break with him somehow--now--to-day. I won't let him think me ... what
I've been all along to him.... Bless his foolish heart!..."

This resolution coloured his reverie throughout the uptown journey. And
he strengthened himself with it, deriving a sort of acrid comfort from
the knowledge that henceforth none should know the burden of his
misfortunes save himself. There was no deprecation of Kellogg's
goodness in his mood, simply determination no longer to be a charge
upon it. To contemplate the sum total of the benefits he had received
at Kellogg's hands, since the day when the latter had found him ill and
half-starved, friendless as a stray pup, on the bench in Washington
Square, staggered his imagination. He could never repay it, he told
himself, save inadequately, little by little--mostly by gratitude and
such consideration as he purposed now to exhibit by removing himself
and his distresses from the other's ken. Here was an end to comfort for
him, an end to living in Kellogg's rooms, eating his food, busying his
servants, spending his money--not so much borrowed as pressed upon him.
He stood at the cross-roads, but in no doubt as to which way he should
most honourably take, though it took him straight back to that from
which Kellogg had rescued him.

There crawled in his mind a clammy memory of the sort of housing he had
known in those evil days, and he shuddered inwardly, smelling again the
effluvia of dank oilcloth and musty carpets, of fish-balls and fried
ham, of old-style plumbing and of nine-dollar-a-week humanity in the
unwashen raw--the odour of misery that permeated the lodgings to which
his lack of means had introduced him. He could see again, and with a
painful vividness of mental vision, the degenerate "brownstone fronts"
that mask those haunts of wretchedness, with their flights of crumbling
brownstone steps leading up to oaken portals haggard with flaking
paint, flanked by squares of soiled note-paper upon which inexpert
hands had traced the warning, not: "Abandon hope all ye who enter
here," but: "Furnished rooms to let with board." And pursuing this grim
trail of memory, whether he would or no--again he climbed, wearily at
the end of a wearing day, a darksome well of a staircase up and up to
an eyrie under the eaves, denominated in the terminology of landladies
a "top hall back"--a cramped refuge haunted by pitiful ghosts of the
hopes and despairs of its former tenants. And he remembered with
reminiscently aching muscles the comfort of such a "single bed" as is
peculiar (one hopes) to top hall backs, and with a qualm what it was to
cook a surreptitious meal on a metal heater clamped to the gas-bracket
(with ears keen to catch the scuffle of the landlady's feet as she
skulked in the hall, jealous of her gas bill).

And to this he must return, to that treadmill round of blighted days
and joyless nights must set his face....

Alighting at the Grand Central Station he packed the double weight of
his luggage and his cares a few blocks northward on Madison Avenue ere
turning west toward the bachelor rooms which Kellogg had established in
the roaring Forties, just the other side of _the_ Avenue--Fifth
Avenue, on a corner of which Duncan presently was held up for a time by
a press of traffic. He lingered indifferently, waiting for the mounted
policeman to clear a way across, watching the while with lack-lustre
eyes the interminable procession of cabs and landaus, taxis and
town-cars that romped by hazardously, crowding the street from curb to
curb.

The day was of young June, though grey and a little chill with the
discouraged spirit of a retarded season. Though the hegira of the
well-to-do to their summer homes had long since set in, still there
remained in the city sufficient of their class to keep the Avenue
populous from Twenty-third Street north to the Plaza in the evening
hours. The suggestion of wealth, or luxury, of money's illimitable
power, pervaded the atmosphere intensely, an ineluctable influence, to
an independent man heady, to Duncan maddening. He surveyed the parade
with mutiny in his heart. All this he had known, a part of it had
been--upon a time. Now ... the shafts of his roving eyes here and there
detected faces recognisable, of men and women whose acquaintance he had
once owned. None recognised him who stood there worn, shabby and tired.
He even caught the direct glance of a girl who once had thought him
worth winning, who had set herself to stir his heart and--had been
successful. To-day she looked him straight in the eyes, apparently,
with undisturbed serenity, then as calmly looked over and through and
beyond him. Her limousine hurried her on, enthroned impregnably above
the envious herd.

He sped her transit with a mirthless chuckle. "You're right," he said,
"dead right. You simply don't know me any more, my dear--you musn't;
you can't afford to any more than I could afford to know you."

None the less the fugitive incident seemed to brim his disconsolate
cup. In complete dejection of mind and spirit he pushed on to Kellogg's
quarters, buoyed by a single hope--that Kellogg might be out of town or
delayed at his office.

In that event Duncan might have a chance to gather up his belongings
and escape unhandicapped by the immediate necessity of justifying his
course. At another time, surely, the explanation was inevitable; say
to-morrow; he was not cur enough to leave his friend without a word.
But to-night he would willingly be spared. He apprehended unhappily the
interview with Kellogg; he was in no temper for argumentation, felt
scarcely strong enough to hold his own against the fire of objections
with which Kellogg would undoubtedly seek to shake his stand. Kellogg
could talk, Heaven alone knew how winningly he could talk! with all the
sound logic of a close reasoner, all the enthusiasm of youth and
self-confidence, all the persuasiveness of profound conviction singular
to successful men. Duncan had been wont to say of him that Kellogg
could talk the hind-leg off of a mule. He recalled this now with a sour
grin: "That means me..."

The elevator boy, knowing him of old, neglected to announce his
arrival, and Duncan had his own key to the door of Kellogg's apartment.
He let himself in with futile stealth: as was quite right and proper,
Kellogg's man Robbins was in attendance--a stupefied Robbins,
thunderstruck by the unexpected return of his master's friend and
guest. "Good Lord!" he cried at sight of Duncan. "Beg your pardon, sir,
but--but it can't be you!"

"Your mistake, Robbins. Unfortunately it is." Duncan surrendered his
luggage. "Mr. Kellogg in?"

"No, sir. But I'm expecting him any minute. He'll be surprised to see
you back."

"Think so?" said Duncan dully. "He doesn't know me, if he is."

"You see, sir, we thought you was out West."

"So you did." Duncan moved toward the door of his own bedroom, Robbins
following.

"It was only yesterday I posted a letter to you for Mr. Kellogg, sir,
and the address was Omaha."

"I didn't get that far. Fetch along that suitcase, will you please? I
want to put some clean things in it."

"Then you're not staying in town over night, Mr. Duncan?"

"I don't know. I'm not staying here, anyway." Duncan switched on the
lights in his room. "Put it on the bed, Robbins. I'll pack as quickly
as I can. I'm in a hurry."

"Yes, sir, but--I hope there's nothing wrong?"

"Then you lose," returned Duncan grimly: "everything's wrong." He
jerked viciously at an obstinate bureau drawer, and when it yielded
unexpectedly with the well-known impishness of the inanimate, dumped
upon the floor a tangled miscellany of shirts, socks, gloves, collars
and ties.

"Didn't you like the business, sir?"

"No, I didn't like the business--and it didn't like me. It's the same
old story, Robbins. I've lost my job again--that's all."

"I'm very sorry, sir."

"Thank you--but that's all right. I'm used to it."

"And you're going to leave, sir?"

"I am, Robbins."

"I--may I take the liberty of hoping it's to take another position?"

"You may, but you lose a second time. I've just made up my mind I'm not
going to hang round here any longer. That's all."

"But," Robbins ventured, hovering about with exasperating
solicitude--"but Mr. Kellogg'd never permit you to leave in this way,
sir."

"Wrong again, Robbins," said Duncan curtly, annoyed.

"Yes, sir. Very good, sir." With the instinct of the well-trained
servant, Robbins started to leave, but hesitated. He was really very
much disturbed by Duncan's manner, which showed a phase of his
character new in Robbins' experience of him. Ordinarily reverses such
as this had seemed merely to serve to put Duncan on his mettle, to
infuse him with a determination to try again and win out, whatever the
odds; and at such times he was accustomed to exhibit a mad
irresponsibility of wit and a gaiety of spirit (whether it were a mask
or no) that only outrivalled his high good humour when things
ostensibly were going well with him.

Intermittently, between his spasms of employment, he had been Kellogg's
guest for several years, not infrequently for months at a time; and so
Robbins had come to feel a sort of proprietary interest in the young
man, second only to the regard which he had for his employer. Like most
people with whom Duncan came in contact, Robbins admired him from a
respectful distance, and liked him very well withal. He would have been
much distressed to have harm happen to him, and he was very much
concerned and alarmed to see him so candidly discouraged and sick at
heart. Perhaps too quick to draw an inference, Robbins mistrusted his
intentions; his dour habit boded ill in the servant's understanding:
men in such moods were apt to act unwisely. But if only he might
contrive to delay Duncan until Kellogg's return, he thought the former
might yet be saved from the consequences of folly of some insensate
sort. And casting about for an excuse, he grasped at the most sovereign
solace he knew of.

"Beg pardon, sir," he advanced, hesitant, "but perhaps you're just
feeling a bit blue. Won't you let me bring you a drop of something?"

"Of course I will," said Duncan emphatically over his shoulder. "And
get it now, will you, while I'm packing.... And, Robbins!"

"Sir?"

"Only put a little in it."

"A little what, sir?"

"Seltzer, of course."




II


TO HIM THAT HATH

It had been a forlorn hope at best, this attempt of his to escape
Kellogg: Duncan acknowledged it when, his packing rudely finished, he
started for the door, Robbins reluctantly surrendering the suit-case
after exhausting his repertoire of devices to delay the young man. But
at that instant the elevator gate clashed in the outer corridor and
Kellogg's key rattled in the lock, to an accompanying confusion of
voices, all masculine and all very cheerful.

Duncan sighed and motioned Robbins away with his luggage. "No hope
now," he told himself. "But--O Lord!"

Incontinently there burst into the room four men: Jim Long, Larry
Miller, another whom Duncan did not immediately recognise, and Kellogg
himself, bringing with them an atmosphere breezy with jubilation.
Before he knew it Duncan was boisterously overwhelmed. He got his
breath to find Kellogg pumping his hand.

"Nat," he was saying, "you're the only other man on earth I was wishing
could be with me tonight! Now my happiness is complete. Gad, this is
lucky!"

"You think so?" countered Duncan, forcing a smile. "Hello, you boys!"
He gave a hand to Long and Miller. "How're you all?" He warmed to their
friendly faces and unfeigned welcome. "My, but it's good to see you!"
There was relief in the fact that Kellogg, after a single glance,
forbore to question his return; he was to be counted upon for tact, was
Kellogg. Now he strangled surprise by turning to the fourth member of
the party.

"Nat," he said, "I want you to meet Mr. Bartlett. Mr. Bartlett, Mr.
Duncan."

A wholesome smile dawned on Duncan's face as he encountered the blank
blue stare of a young man whose very smooth and very bright red face
was admirably set off by semi-evening dress. "Great Scott!" he cried,
warmly pressing the lackadaisical hand that drifted into his. "Willy
Bartlett--after all these years!"

A sudden animation replaced the vacuous stare of the blue eyes.
"Duncan!" he stammered. "I say, this is rippin'!"

"As bad as that?" Duncan essayed an accent almost English and nodded
his appreciation of it: something which Bartlett missed completely.

He was very young--a very great deal younger, Duncan thought, than when
they had been classmates, what time Duncan shared his rooms with
Kellogg: very much younger and suffering exquisitely from
over-sophistication. His drawl barely escaped being inimitable; his air
did not escape it. "Smitten with my old trouble," Duncan appraised him:
"too much money... Heaven knows I hope he never recovers!"

As for Willy, he was momentarily more nearly human than he had seemed
from the moment of his first appearance. "You know," he blurted, "this
is simply extraordinary. I say, you chaps, Duncan and I haven't met for
years--not since he graduated. We belonged to the same frat, y'know,
and had a jolly time of it, if he was an upper-class man. No side about
him at all, y'know--absolutely none whatever. Whenever I had to go out
on a spree, I'd always get Nat to show me round."

"I was pretty good at that," Duncan admitted a trifle ruefully.

But Willy rattled on, heedless. "He knew more pretty gels, y'know... I
say, old chap, d'you know as many now?"

Duncan shook his head. "The list has shrunk. I'm a changed man, Willy."

"Ow, I say, you're chawfin'," Willy argued incredulously. "I don't
believe that, y'know--hardly. I say, you remember the night you showed
me how to play faro bank?"

"I'll never forget it," Duncan told him gravely. "And I remember what a
plug we thought my room-mate was because he wouldn't come with us." He
nodded significantly toward the amused Kellogg.

"Not him!" cried Willy, expostulant. "Not really? Why it cawn't be!"

"Fact," Duncan assured him. "He was working his way through college,
you see, whereas I was working my way through my allowance--and then
some. That's why you never met him, Willy: he worked--and got the
habit. We loafed--with the same result. That's why he's useful and
you're ornamental, and I'm--" He broke off in surprise. "Hello!" he
said as Robbins offered a tray to the three on which were slim-stemmed
glasses filled with a pale yellow, effervescent liquid. "Why the blond
waters of excitement, please?" he inquired, accepting a glass.

From across the room Larry Miller's voice sounded. "Are you ready,
gentlemen? We'll drink to him first and then he can drink to his royal
little self. To the boy who's getting on in the world! To the junior
member of L.J. Bartlett and Company!"

Long applauded loudly: "Hear! Hear!" And even Willy Bartlett chimed in
with an unemotional: "Good work!" Mechanically Duncan downed the toast;
Kellogg was the only man not drinking it, and from that the meaning was
easily to be inferred. With a stride Duncan caught his hand and crushed
it in his own.

"Harry," he said a little huskily, "I can't tell you how glad I am!
It's the best news I've had in years!"

Kellogg's responsive pressure was answer enough. "It makes it doubly
worth while, to win out and have you all so glad!" he said.

"So you've taken him into the firm, eh?" Duncan inquired of Bartlett.

The blue eyes widened stonily. "The governor has. I'm not in the
business, y'know. Never had the slightest turn for it, what?" Willy set
aside his glass. "I say, I must be moving. No, I cawn't stop, Kellogg,
really. I was dressin' at the club and Larry told me about it, so I
just dropped round to tell you how jolly glad I am."

"Your father hadn't told you, then?"

"Who, the governor?" Willy looked unutterably bored. "Why, he gave up
tryin' to talk business with me long ago. I can't get interested in it,
'pon my word. Of course I knew he thought the deuce and all of you, but
I hadn't an idea they were goin' to take you into the firm. What?"

Long and Miller interrupted, proposing adieus which Kellogg vainly
contended.

"Why, you're only just here--" he expostulated.



"Cawn't help it, old chap," Willy assured him earnestly. "I must go,
anyway. I've a dinner engagement."

"You'll be late, won't you?"

"Doesn't matter in the least; I'm always late. 'Night, Kellogg.
Congratulations again."

"We just dropped round to take off our hats to you," Long continued,
pumping Kellogg's hand.

"And tell you what a good fellow we think you are," added Miller,
following suit.

"You don't know how good you make me feel," Kellogg told them.

Under cover of this diversion Duncan was making one last effort to slip
away; but before he could gather together his impedimenta and get to
the door Willy Bartlett intercepted him.

"I say, Duncan--"

"Oh, hell!" said Duncan beneath his breath. He paused ungraciously
enough.

"We've got to see a bit of one another, now we've met again, y'know.
Wish you'd look me up--Half Moon Club'll get me 'most any time. We'll
have to arrange to make a regular old-fashioned night of it, just for
memory's sake."

Duncan nodded, edging past him. "I've memories enough," he said.

"Right-oh! Any reason at all, y'know, just so we have the night."

"Good enough," assented Duncan vaguely. He suffered his hand to be
wrung with warmth. "I'll not forget--good-night." Then he pulled up and
groaned, for Willy's insistence had frustrated his design: Kellogg had
suddenly become alive to his attitude and hailed him over the heads of
Long and Miller.

"Nat, I say! Where the devil are you going?"

"Over to the hotel," said Duncan.

"The deuce you are! What hotel?"

"The one I'm stopping at."

"Not on your life. You're not going just yet--I haven't had half a
chance to talk to you. Robbins, take Mr. Duncan's things."

Duncan, set upon by Robbins, who had been hovering round for just that
purpose, lifted his shoulders in resignation, turning back into the
room as Miller and Long said good-night to him and left at Bartlett's
heels, and smiled awry in semi-humorous deprecation of the way in which
he let Kellogg out-manoeuvre him. When it came to that, it was hard to
refuse Kellogg anything; he had that way with him. Especially if one
liked him... And how could anyone help liking him?

Kellogg had him now, holding him fast by either shoulder, at arm's
length, and shaking a reproving head at his friend. "You big duffer!"
he said. "Did you think for a minute I'd let you throw me down like
that?"

Duncan stood passive, faintly amused and touched by the other's show of
affection. "No," he said, "I didn't really think so. But it was worth
trying on, of course."

"Look here, have you dined?"

'At this suggestion Duncan stiffened and fell back. "No, but--"

Kellogg swept the ground from under his feet. "Robbins," he told the
man, "order in dinner for two from the club, and tell 'em to hurry it
up."

"Yes, sir," said Robbins, and flew to obey before Duncan could get a
chance to countermand his part in the order.

"And now," continued Kellogg, "we've got the whole evening before us in
which to chin. Sit down." He led Duncan to an arm-chair and gently but
firmly plumped him into its capacious depths. "We'll have a snug little
dinner here and--what do you say to taking in a show afterwards?"

"I say no."

"You dassent, my boy. This is the night we celebrate. I'm feeling
pretty good to-night."

"You ought to, Harry." Duncan struggled to rouse himself to share in
the spirit of gratulation with which Kellogg was bubbling. "I'm mighty
glad, old man. It's a great step up for you."

"It's all of that. You could have knocked me over with a feather when
Bartlett sprang it on me this morning. Of course, I was expecting
something--a boost in salary, or something like that. Bartlett knew
that other houses in the Street had made me offers--I've been pretty
lucky of late and pulled off one or two rather big deals--but a
partnership with L.J. Bartlett--! Think of it, Nat!"

"I'm thinking of it--and it's great."

"It'll keep me mighty busy," Kellogg blundered blindly on; "it means a
lot of extra work--but you know I like to work...."

"That's right, you do," agreed Duncan drearily. "It's queer to me--it
must be a great thing to like to work."

"You bet it's a great thing; why, I couldn't exist if I couldn't work.
You remember that time I laid off for a month in the country--for my
health's sake? I'll never forget it: hanging round all the time with my
hands empty--everyone else with something to do. I wouldn't go through
with it again for a fortune. Never felt so useless and in the way--"

"But," interrupted Duncan, knitting his brows as he grappled with this
problem, "you were independent, weren't you? You had money--could pay
your board?"

"Of course; nevertheless, I felt in the way."

"That's funny...."

"It's straight."

"I know it is; it wouldn't be you if you didn't love work. It wouldn't
be me if I did.... Look here, Harry; suppose you didn't have any money
and couldn't pay your board--and had nothing to do. How'd you feel in
that case?"

"I don't know. Anyhow, that's rot--"

"No, it isn't rot. I'm trying to make you understand how I feel
when--when it's that way with me.... As it generally is." He raised one
hand and let it fall with a gesture of despondency so eloquent that it
roused Kellogg out of his own preoccupation.

"Why, Nat!" he cried, genuinely sympathetic. "I've been so taken up
with myself that I forgot.... I hadn't looked for you till to-morrow."

"You knew, then?"

"I met Atwater at lunch to-day. He told me; said he was sorry, but--"

"Yes. Everybody is always sorry, _but_--"

Kellogg let his hand fall on Duncan's shoulder. "I'm sorry, too, old
man. But don't lose heart. I know it's pretty tough on a fellow--"

"The toughest part of it is that you got the job for me--and I
_had_ to fall down."

"Don't think of that. It's not your fault--"

"You're the only man who believes that, Harry."

"Buck up. I'll stumble across some better opening for you before long,
and--"

"Stop right there. I'm through--"

"Don't talk that way, Nat. I'll get you in right somewhere."

"You're the best-hearted man alive, Harry--but I'll see you damned
first."

"Wait." Kellogg demanded his attention. "Here's this man Burnham--you
don't know him, but he's as keen as they make 'em. He's on the track of
some wonderful scheme for making illuminating gas from crude oil; if it
goes through--if the invention's really practicable--it's bound to work
a revolution. He's down in Washington now--left this afternoon to look
up the patents. Now he needs me, to get the ear of the Standard Oil
people, and I'll get you in there."

"What right've you got to do that?" demanded Duncan. "What the dickens
do I know about illuminating gas or crude oil? Burnham'd never thank
you for the likes o' me."

"But--thunder!--you can learn. All you need--."

"Now see here, Harry!" Duncan gave him pause with a manner not to be
denied. "Once and for all time understand I'm through having you
recommend an incompetent--just because we're friends."

"But, Harry--"

"And I'm through living on you while I'm out of a job. That's final."

"But, man--listen to me!--when we were at college--"

"That was another matter."

"How many times did you pay the room-rent when I was strapped? How many
times did your money pull me through when I'd have had to quit and
forfeit my degree because I couldn't earn enough to keep on?"

"That's different. You earned enough finally to square up. You don't
owe me anything."

"I owe you the gratitude for the friendly hand that put me in the way
of earning--that kept me going when the going was rank. Besides, the
conditions are just reversed now; you'll do just as I did--make good in
the world and, when it's convenient, to me. As for living here, you're
perfectly welcome."

"I know it--and more," Duncan assented a little wearily. "Don't think I
don't appreciate all you've done for me. But I know and you must
understand that I can't keep on living on you,--and I won't."

For once baffled, Kellogg stared at him in consternation. Duncan met
his gaze steadily, strong in the sincerity of his attitude. At length
Kellogg surrendered, accepting defeat. "Well...." He shrugged
uncomfortably. "If you insist ..."

"I do."

"Then that's settled."

"Yes, that's settled."

"Dinner," said Robbins from the doorway, "is
served."




III


INSPIRATION

"Look here, Nat," demanded Kellogg, when they were half way through the
meal, "do you mind telling me what you're going to do?"

Duncan pondered this soberly. "No," he replied in the end.

Kellogg waited a moment, but his guest did not continue. "What does
that kind of a 'No' mean, Nat?"

"It means I don't mind telling you."

Again an appreciable pause elapsed.

"Well, then, what do you mean to do?"

"I'm sure I don't know."

Kellogg regarded him sombrely for a moment, then in silence returned
his attention to his plate; and in silence, for the most part, the
remainder of the dinner was served and eaten. Duncan himself had
certainly enough to occupy his mind, while Kellogg had altogether
forgotten his own cause for rejoicing in his concern for the fortunes
of his friend. He was entirely of the opinion that something would have
to be done for Nat, with or without his consent; and he sounded the
profoundest depths of romantic impossibilities in his attempts to
discover some employment suited to Duncan's interesting but
impracticable assortment of faculties and qualifications, natural and
acquired. But nothing presented itself as feasible in view of the fact
that employment which would prove immediately remunerative was
required. And by the time that Robbins, clearing the board, left them
alone with coffee and cigars and cigarettes, Kellogg was fain to
confess failure--though the confession was a very private one, confined
to himself only.

"Nat," he said suddenly, rousing that young man out of the dreariest of
meditations, "what under the sun _can_ you do?"

"Me? I don't know. Why bother your silly old head about that? I'll make
out somehow."

"But surely there's something you'd rather do than anything else."

"My dear sir," Duncan told him impressively, "the only walk of life in
which I am fitted to shine is that of the idle son of a rich and
foolish father. Since I lost that job I've not been worth my salt."

"That's piffle. There isn't a man living who hasn't some talent or
other, some sort of an ability concealed about his person."

"You can search me," Duncan volunteered gloomily.

His unresponsiveness irritated Kellogg; he thought a while, then
delivered himself of a didactic conclusion:

"The trouble with you is you were brought up all wrong."

"Well, I've been brought down all right. Besides, that's a platitude in
my case."

"Let's see: I've know you--er--nine years."

"Is it that long?" Duncan looked up from a gloomy inspection of the
interior of his demitasse, displaying his first gleam of interest in
this analysis of his character. "You are a long-suffering old duffer.
Any man who'd stand for me for nine years--"

"That'll be all of that," Kellogg cut in sharply. "I was going on to
say that you can't room with a man for four terms at college and then
know him, off and on, for five years more, pretty intimately, without
forming a pretty clear estimate of what he's worth in your own mind."

"And I don't mind telling you, Harry, I think you're the best little
business man as well as the finest sort of an all-round good-fellow on
this continent."

"Thanks awfully. I presume that's why you're determined to throw me
down just at the time you need me most.... What I was trying to get at
is the fact that I've never doubted your ultimate success for an
instant."

"You'd be a mighty lonesome minority in a congress of my employers,
Harry."

"Given the proper opportunity--"

"Hold on," Duncan interrupted. "I know just what you're going to say,
and it's all very fine, and I'm proud that you want to say it of me.
But you're dead wrong, Harry. The truth is I haven't got it in me--the
capacity to succeed. Just as much as you love work, I hate it. I ought
to know, for I've had a good, hard try at it--several tries, in fact.
And you know what they came to."

"But if you persist in this way, Nat,--don't you know what it means?"

"None better. It means going back to what you helped me out of--the
life that nearly killed me."

"And you'd rather--"

"I'd rather that a thousand years before I'd sponge on you another
day.... But, on the level, I'd as lieve try the East River or turn on
the gas.... What's the use? That's the way I feel."

"That's fool talk. Brace up and be a man. All you need is a way to earn
money."

"No," Duncan insisted firmly: "get it. I'll never be able to earn
it--that's a cinch."

Kellogg laughed a little mirthlessly, absorbed in revolving something
which had popped into his head within the last few moments. "There are
ways to get it," he admitted abstractedly, "if you're not too
particular."

"I'm not. I only wish I understood the burglar business."

This time Kellogg laughed outright. He sat up with a new spirit in his
manner. "You mean you'd steal to get money?"

"Oh, well ..." Duncan smiled a trace sheepishly. "I can't think of
anything hardly I wouldn't do to get it."

"Very well, my son. Now attend to uncle." Kellogg leaned across the
table, fixing him with an enthusiastic eye. "Here, have a smoke. I'm
going to demonstrate high finance to your debased intelligence." He
thrust the cigarette case over to Duncan, who helped himself
mechanically, his gaze held in wonder to Kellogg's face.

"Fire when ready," he assented.

"I know a way," said Kellogg slowly, "by which, if you'll discard a
scruple or two, you can be worth a million dollars--or
thereabouts--within a year."

Duncan held a lighted match until it singed his fingertips, the while
he stared agape. "Say that again," he requested mildly.

"You can be worth a million in a year."

"Ah!" Duncan nodded slowly and comprehendingly. He turned aside in his
chair and raked a second match across the sole of his shoe. "Let him
rave," he observed enigmatically, and began to smoke.
 "No, I'm not dippy; and I'm perfectly serious."

"Of course. But what'd they do to me if I were caught?"

"This is not a joke; the proposition's perfectly legal; it's being done
right along."

"And I could do it, Harry?"

"A man of your calibre couldn't fail."

"Would you mind ringing for Robbins?" Duncan asked abruptly.

"Certainly." Kellogg pressed a button at his elbow. "What d'you want?"

"A straight-jacket and a doctor to tell which one of us needs it."

Kellogg, chagrined as he always was if joked with when expounding one
of his schemes, broke into a laugh that lasted until Robbins appeared.

"You rang, sir?"

"Yes. Put those decanters over here, and some glasses, please."

"Yes, sir."

The man obeyed and withdrew. Kellogg filled two glasses, handing one to
Duncan.

"Now be decent and listen to me, Nat. I've thought this thing over
for--oh, any amount of time. I'll bet anything it will work. What d'you
say? Would you like to try it?"

"Would I like to try it?" A conviction of Kellogg's earnestness forced
itself upon Duncan's understanding. "Would I--!" He lifted his glass
and drained it at a gulp. "Why, that's the first laugh I've had for a
month!"

"Then I'll tell you--"

Duncan placed a pleading hand on his forearm. "Don't kid me, Harry," he
entreated.

"Not a bit of it. This is straight goods. If you want to try it and
will follow the rules I lay down, I'll guarantee you'll be a rich man
inside of twelve months."

"Rules! Man, I'll follow all the rules in the world! Come on--I'm
getting palpitation of the heart, waiting. Tell it to me: what've I got
to do?"

"Marry," said Kellogg serenely.

"Marry!" Duncan echoed, aghast.

"Marry," reaffirmed the other with unbroken gravity.

"Marry--who?"

"A girl with a fortune.... You see, I can't guarantee the precise size
of her pile. That all depends on luck and the locality. But it'll run
anywhere from several hundred thousand up to a million--perhaps more."

Duncan sank back despondently. "You ought to be ashamed of yourself,
Harry," he said dully; "you had me all excited, for a minute."

"No, but honestly, I mean what I say."

"Now look here: do you really think any girl with a million would take
a chance on me?"

"She'll jump at it."

Duncan thought this over for a while. Then his lips twitched. "What's
the matter with her?" he inquired. "I'm willing to play the game as it
lies, but I bar lunatics and cripples."

"There's no particular her--yet. You can take your pick. I've no more
idea where she is than you have."

"Now I know you're stark, staring, gibbering----"

"Not a bit of it. I'm inspired--that's all. I've solved your
problem--you only can't believe it."

"How could I? What the devil are you getting at, anyhow?"

"This pet scheme of mine. Lend me your ears. Have you ever lived in a
one-horse country town--a place with one unspeakable hotel and about
twenty stores and five churches?"

"No ..."

"I have; I was born in one of 'em.... Have you any idea what becomes of
the young people of such towns?"

"Not a glimmering."

"Then I'll enlighten your egregious density. ...The boys--those who've
got the stuff in them--strike out for the cities to make their
everlasting fortunes. Generally they do it, too."

"The same as you."

"The same as me," assented Kellogg, unperturbed. "But the yaps, the
Jaspers, stay there and clerk in father's store. After office-hours
they put on their very best mail-order clothes and parade up and down
Main Street, talking loud and flirting obviously with the girls. The
girls haven't much else to do; they don't find it so easy to get away.
A few of 'em escape to boarding-schools and colleges, where they meet
and marry young men from the cities, but the majority of them have to
stay at home and help mother--that's a tradition. If there are two
children or more, the boys get the chance every time; the girls stay
home to comfort the old folks in their old age. Why, by the time
they're old enough to think of marrying--and they begin young, for
that's about the only excitement they find available--you won't find a
small country town between here and the Mississippi where there aren't
about four girls to every boy."

"It's a horrible thought ..."

"You'd think so if you knew what the boys were like. There isn't one in
ten that a girl with any sense or self-respect could force herself to
marry if she ever saw anything better. Do you begin to see my drift?"

"I do not. But go on drifting."

"No? Why, the demand for eligible males is three hundred per cent. in
excess of the supply. Don't you know--no, you don't: I got to that
first--that there are twenty times as many old maids in small country
towns as there are in the cities? It's a fact, and the reason for it is
because when they were young they couldn't lower themselves to accept
the pick of the local matrimonial market. Now, do you see--?"

"You're as interesting as a magazine serial. Please continue in your
next. I pant with anticipation."

"You're an ass.... Now take a young chap from a city, with a good
appearance, more or less a gentleman, who doesn't talk like a yap or
walk like a yap or dress like a yap or act like a yap, and throw him
into such a town long enough for the girls to get acquainted with him.
He simply can't lose, can't fail to cop out the best-looking girl with
the biggest bank-roll in town. I tell you, there's nothing to it!"

"It's wonderful to listen to you, Harry."

"I'm talking horse sense, my son. Now consider yourself: down on your
luck, don't know how to earn a decent living, refusing to accept
anything from your friends, ready (you say) to do almost anything to
get some money.... And think of the country heiresses, with plenty of
money for two, pining away in--in innocuous desuetude--hundreds of
them, fine, straight, good girls, girls you could easily fall in love
with, sighing their lives away for the lack of the likes of you....
Now, why not take one, Nat--when you come to consider it, it's your
duty--marry her and her bank-roll, make her happy, make yourself happy,
and live a contented life on the sunny side of Easy Street for the rest
of your natural born days? Can't you see it now?"

"Yes," Duncan admitted, half-persuaded of the plausibility of the
scheme. "I see--and I admire immensely the intellect that conceived the
notion, Harry. But ... I can't help thinking there must be a catch in
it somewhere."

"Not if you follow my instructions. You see, having come from just such
a hole-in-the-ground, I know just what I'm talking about. Believe me,
everything depends on the way you go about it. There are a lot of
things to contend with at first; you won't enjoy it at all, to begin
with. But I can demonstrate how it can be managed so that you'll win
out to a moral certainty."

Duncan drew a deep breath, sat back and looked Kellogg over very
critically. There was not a suspicion of a gleam of humour in his face;
to the contrary, it blazed with the ardour of the instinctive schemer,
the man who, with the ability to originate, throws himself heart and
soul into the promotion of the product of his imagination. Kellogg was
not sketching the outlines of a gigantic practical joke; he believed
implicitly in the feasibility of his project; and so strongly that he
could infuse even the less susceptible fancy of Duncan with some of his
faith.

"If I didn't know you so well, Harry," said Duncan slowly, "I'd be
certain you were mad. I'm not at all sure that I'm sane. It's raving
idiocy--and it's a pretty damned rank thing to do, to start
deliberately out to marry a woman for her money. But I've been through
a little hell of my own in my time, and--it's not alluring to
contemplate a return to it. There's nothing mad enough nor bad enough
to stop me. What've I got to do?"

Kellogg beamed his triumph. "You'll try it on, then?"

"I'll try anything on. It's a contemptible, low-lived piece of
business--but good may come of it; you can't tell. What've I got to
do?"

Slipping back, Kellogg knitted his fingers and stared at the ceiling,
smiling faintly to himself as he enumerated the conditions that first
appealed to his understanding as essentials toward success.

"First, pick out your town: one of two or three thousand
inhabitants--no larger. I'd suggest, at a hazard guess, some place in
the interior of Pennsylvania. Most of such towns have at least one rich
man with a marriageable daughter--but we'll make sure of that before we
settle on one. Of course any suburban town is barred."

"How so?"

"Oh, they don't count. The girls always know people in the city--can
get there easily. That spoils the game."

"How about the game laws?"

"I'm coming to them. Of course there isn't an open or close season, and
the hunting's always good, but there are a few precautionary measures
to be taken if you want to be sure of bagging an heiress. You won't
like most of 'em."

"Like 'em! I'll live by them!"

"Well, here come the things you mustn't do. You mustn't swear or use
slang; you mustn't smoke and you mustn't drink--"

"Heavens! are these people as inhuman as all that?"

"Worse than that. It might be fatal if you were ever seen in the hotel
bar. And to begin with, you must refuse all invitations, of any sort,
whether to dances, parties, church sociables, or even Sunday dinners."

"Why _Sunday_ dinners?"

"Because Sunday's the only day you'll be invited. Dinner on week-days
is from twelve to twelve-thirty, and it's strictly a business
matter--no time for guests. But you needn't fret; they won't ask you
till they've sized you up pretty carefully."

"Oh!..."

"Moreover, you must be very particular about your dress; it must be
absolutely faultless, but very quiet: clothing sober--dark greys and
blacks--and plain, but the very last word as to cut and fit. And
everything must be in keeping--the very best of shirts, collars, ties,
hats, socks, shoes, underwear--." Kellogg caught Duncan's look and
laughed. "Your laundress will report on everything, you know; so you
must be impeccable."

"I'll be even that--whatever it is."

"Be very particular about having your shoes polished, shave daily and
manicure yourself religiously--but don't let 'em catch you at it."

"Would they raid me if they did?"

"And then, my son, you must work."

Kellogg paused to let his lesson sink in. After a time Duncan observed
plaintively: "I knew there was a catch in it somewhere. What kind of
work?"

"It doesn't make any difference, so long as you get and hold some job
in the town."

"Well, that lets me out. You'll have to sic some other poor devil on
this glittering proposition of yours. I couldn't hold a job in--"

"Wait! I'll tell you how to do it in just a minute."

"I don't mind listening, but--"

"You'll cinch the whole business by going to church without a break.
Don't ever fail--morning and evening every Sunday. Don't forget that."

"Why?"

"It's the most important thing of all."

"Does going to church make such a hit with the young female
Jasper--the Jasperette, as it were?"

"It'll make you more solid than anything else with her popper and
mommer, and that's very necessary when you're a candidate for their
ducats as well as their daughter. You must work and you must go to
church."

"That can't be all. Surely you can think of something else?"

"Those are the cardinal rules--church and work until you've landed your
heiress. After that you can move back to civilisation.... Now as soon
as you strike your town you want to make arrangements for board and
lodging in some old woman's house--preferably an old maid. You'll be
sure to find at least half a dozen of 'em, willing to take boarders,
but you want to be equally sure to pick out the one that talks the
most, so that she'll tell the neighbours all about you. Don't worry
about that, though, they all talk. When you've moved In, stock up your
room with about twenty of the driest-looking books in the world--law
books look most imposing; fix up a table with lots of stationery--pens
and pencils, red and black ink and all that sort of thing; make the
room look as if you were the most sincere student ever. And by no means
neglect to have a well-worn Bible prominently in evidence: you can buy
one second-hand at some book-store before you start out."

"I'd have to, of course. I thank you for the flattery. Proceed with the
programme of the gay, mad life I must lead. I'm going to have a swell
time: that's perfectly plain."

"As soon as you're shaken down in your room, make the rounds of the
stores and ask for work. Try and get into the dry-goods emporium if you
can: the girls all shop there. But anything will do, except a grocery
or a hardware store and places like that. You mustn't consider any
employment that would soil your clothes or roughen your lily-white
hands."

"You expect me to believe I'd have any chance of winning a
millionaire's daughter if I were a ribbon-clerk in a dry-goods store?"

"The best in the world. The ribbon-clerk is her social equal; he calls
her Mary and she calls him Joe."

"Done with you: me for the ribbon counter. Anything else?"

"The storekeepers aren't apt to employ you at first; they'll be
suspicious of you."

"They will be afterwards, all right. However--?"

"So you must simply call on them--walk in, locate the boss and tell
him: 'I'm looking for employment.' Don't press it; just say it and get
out."

"No trouble whatever about that; it's always that way when I ask for
work."

"They'll send for you before long, when they make up their minds that
you're a decent, moral young man; for they know you'll draw trade. And
every Sunday--"

"I know: church!"

"Absolutely.... Pick out the one the rich folks go to. Go in quietly
and do just as they do: stand up and kneel, look up the hymns and sing,
just when they do. Be careful not to sing too loud, or anything like
that: just do it all modestly, as if you were used to it. Better go to
church here two or three times and get the hang of it...."

"Here, now--"

"Nearly all the wealthy codgers in such towns are deacons, you see, and
though they may not speak to you for months on the street, it's their
business to waylay you after the service is over and shake hands with
you and tell you they hope you enjoyed the sermon and ask you to come
again. And you can bank on it, they'll all take notice from the first."

"It's no wonder Bartlett made you a partner, Harry."

"Now behave. I want you to get in right. ... If you follow the rules
I've outlined, not only will all the girls in town be falling over
themselves to get to you first, but their fond parents will be egging
them on. Then all you've got to do is to pick out the one with the
biggest bundle and--"

"Make a play for her?"

"Not on your life. That would be fatal. Your part is to put yourself in
her way. She'll do all the courting, and when she scents the
psychological moment she'll do the proposing."

"It doesn't sound natural, but you certainly seem to know what you're
drooling about."

"You can anchor to that, Nat."

"And are you finished?"

"I am. Of course I'll probably think of more things to wise you to,
before you go."

Duncan laughed shortly and tilted back in his chair, selecting another
cigarette. "And you're the chap who wanted me to go to some bromidic
old show to-night! Harry, you're immense. Why didn't you ever let me
suspect you had all this romantic imagination in your system?"

"Imagination be blowed, son. This is business." Kellogg removed the
stopper from the decanter and filled both glasses again. "Well, what do
you say?"

"I've just said my say, Harry. It's amazing; I'm proud of you."

"But will you do it?"

"Everything else aside, how can I? I've got to live, you know."

"But I propose to stake you."

Duncan came down to earth. "No, you won't; not a cent. I'm in earnest
about this thing: no more sponging on you, Harry. Besides--"

"No, seriously, Nat: I mean this, every word of it. I want you to do
it--to please me, if you like; I've a notion something will come of it.
And I believe from the bottom of my heart there's not the slightest
risk if you'll play the cards as they fall, according to Hoyle."

"Harry, I believe you do."

"I do, firmly. And I'll put the proposition on a business basis, if you
like."

"Go on; there's no holding you."

"You start out to-morrow and order your war kit. Get everything you
need, and plenty of it, and have the bills sent to me. You can be ready
inside a fortnight. The day you start I'll advance you five hundred
dollars. When you're married you can repay me the amount of the
advances with interest at ten per cent, and I'll consider it a mighty
good deal for myself. Now, will you?"

"You mean it?"

"Every word of it. Well?"

For a moment longer Duncan hesitated; then the vision of what he must
return to, otherwise, decided him. In desperation he accepted. "It's a
drowning man's straw," he said, a little breathlessly. "I'm sure I
shouldn't. But I will."

Kellogg flung a hand across the table, palm uppermost.

"Word of honour, Nat?"

Duncan let his hand fall into it. "Word of honour! I'll see it
through."

"Good! It's a bargain." Kellogg lifted his glass high in air. "To the
fortune hunter!" he cried, half laughing.

Duncan nervously fingered the stem of his glass. "God help the future
Mrs. Duncan!" he said, and drank.




IV


TRIUMPH OF MR. HOMER LITTLEJOHN

The twenty-first of June was a day of memorable triumph to me, a day of
memorable events for Radville.

Only the evening previous Will Bigelow and I had indulged in
acrimonious argument in the office of the Bigelow House, the subject of
contention being the importance of the work to which I am devoting my
declining years, to wit, the recording of _The History of Radville
Township, Westerly County, Pennsylvania_; Will maintaining with that
obstinacy for which he is famous, that nothing ever had happened, does
happen, can or will happen in our community, I insisting gently but
firmly that it knows no day unmarked by important occurrence (for it
would ill become me, as the only literary man in Radville, to yield a
point in dispute with the proprietor of the town tavern). Besides, he
was wrong, even as I was indisputably right--only he had not the grace
to admit it. We ended vulgarly with a bet, Will wagering me the best
five-cent Clear Havana in the Bigelow House sample-room that nothing
worth mentioning would take place in Radville before sundown of the
following day.

I left him, returning to my room at Miss Carpenter's (Will and I are
old friends, but I refuse to eat the food he serves his guests), warmed
by the prospect of certain triumph if a little appalled by the prospect
of winning the stake; and sympathising a little with Will, who, for all
his egregious stubborness, has some excuse for upholding his
unreasonable and ridiculous views. He knows no better, having never had
the opportunity to find out for himself how utterly absurd are his
claims for the outside world. Whereas I have.

He's an adventurer at heart, Will Bigelow, a romantic soul crusted
heavily with character--like a volcano smouldering beneath its lava.
For many years he has managed the Bigelow House, with his thoughts
apart from it, his eyes ever seeking the horizon that recedes beyond
the soaring rim of our encircling cup of hills, his heart forever
yearning forth to the outer world; which he erroneously conceives to be
a theatre of events--as if outside of Radville only could there be
things worth seeing, considering, or doing, or matters of any sort that
move momentously! As long as I've known the man (and we played truant
together fifty years ago--hookey, we called it then) he's had his heart
set on going forth from Radville, "for to admire and for to see, for to
view this wide world o'er"; always he has presented himself to me as
one poised on the pinnacle of purpose, ready the next instant to dive
and strike out into the teeming unknown beyond the barrier hills. But
this promise he has never fulfilled. He still maintains that he will
surely go--next week--after the hayin's over--as soon as the ice is
in--the minute Mary graduates from High School. ... But I know he never
will.

So to Will Radville is as dull as ditchwater to a teamster; to me it's
as fascinating as that same ditchwater to a biologist with a
microscope. I see nothing going on in the world outside of Radville
more important than our daily life. Too long I have lived away from it,
a stranger in strange lands, not to appreciate its relative
significance in the scheme of things. It makes all the difference--the
view-point: Will sees Radville from its homely heart outwards, I stand
on its boundaries, a native but yet, somehow in the local esteem (by
reason of my long residence in the East) an outlander. Thus I get a
perspective upon the place, to Will and his ilk denied.

It seems curious that things should have fallen out thus for the two of
us: that Will Bigelow, all afire with the lust for travel, should never
have mustered up enterprise enough to break his home ties, whilst I
whose dearest desire had always been to live no day of my alloted span
away from Radville, should have been, in a manner which I'm bound
presently to betray, forced out into the world; that he, the rebellious
stay-at-home, cursing the destiny which chained him, should have
prospered and become the man of substance he is, while I, mutinously
venturing, should have returned only to watch my sands run out in
poverty--what's little better.

Not that I would have you think me whining: I have enough, little but
ample for my simple needs, if inadequate for my ambitions or my
neighbours' necessities. My editorial work for the _Radville
Citizen_ is quite remunerative, while my weekly column of local
gossip for the _Westerly Gazette_ brings me in a little, and I've
one or two other modest sources of still more modest income. But
Radville folks are poor, many of them, many who are very dear to me for
old sake's sake. There's Sam Graham.... Though I wouldn't have you
understand that as a community we are not moderately prosperous and
contented, comfortable if not energetic and advanced. This is not a
pushing town: it has never known a boom. That I'm sure will some day
come, but I hope not in my time. I have faith in the mountains that
fold us roundabout; they are rich with the possibilities of coal and
iron, and year by year are being more and more widely opened up and
developed; year by year the ranks of flaming, reeking coke ovens push
farther on beside the railway that penetrates our valley. But as yet
their smoke does not foul our skies, nor does their refuse pollute our
river, nor their soot tarnish our vegetation. And as I say, I hope this
is not to be while I live, though sometimes I have fears: Blinky
Lockwood made a fortune selling the coal that was discovered beneath
his father's old farm over Westerly way, and ever since that there's
been more or less quiet prospecting going on in our vicinity. I shall
be sorry to see the day when Radville is other than as it is: the
quiet, peaceful, sleepy little town, nestling in the bosom of the
hills, clean, sweet and wholesome....

But this is rambling far from the momentous twenty-first of June, my
day of triumph.

I shall try to set down connectedly and coherently the events which
culminated in the humbling of Will Bigelow to the dust.

To begin with, we were early startled by the rumour that Hiram Nutt,
theretofore deemed unconquerable, had been disastrously defeated at
checkers in Willoughby's grocery--and that by Watty the tailor, of all
men in Radville. The rumour was confirmed by eleven in the forenoon,
and in itself should have provided us with a nine days' wonder.

As it happened, an event happening almost simultaneously confused our
minds. At eleven-fifteen Miss Carpenter's household was thrown into
consternation by the scandalous behaviour of her black cat, Caesar, who
chose suddenly to terminate a long and outwardly respectable career as
Miss Carpenter's familiar by having kittens under the horse-hair sofa
in the parlour. Incidentally this indelicate and ungentlemanly
behaviour temporarily unloosed the hinges of Miss Carpenter's reason,
so that my supper suffered that evening, and for several days she
wandered round the house with blank and witless eyes. Perhaps I should
have warned her, for I had latterly come to suspect Caesar of leading a
double life; but for reasons which seemed sufficient I had refrained.

By the noon train Roland Barnette received his new summer suit from
Chicago. I did not see it till evening, but heard of it before one,
since Roland donned it immediately and wore it to the bank that very
afternoon. I understand it caused something very near a run on the
bank; people came in to draw a dollar or so or get change and lingered
to feast their outraged visions, so that Blinky Lockwood, the
president, had to send Roland home to change before closing-time. He
changed back, however, as soon as off duty, and spent the rest of the
afternoon and evening hours in Sothern and Lee's, at the soda-fountain;
which Sothern and Lee did not object to, since it drew trade.

Pete Willing established a record by getting drunk at Schwartz's bar by
three in the afternoon, his best previous time being four-thirty; and
Mrs. Willing chased him up Centre Street until, at the corner of Main,
he blundered into the arms of Judge Scott; who ordered him to arrest
and lock himself up; which Pete, being the sheriff, solemnly did,
saying that it was preferable to a return to home and wife.

At five o'clock there was a dog-fight in front of Graham's drug-store.

At five-forty-five the evening train lurched in, bearing The Mysterious
Stranger.

Tracey Tanner saw him first, having driven down to the station with his
father's surrey on the off-chance of picking up a quarter or so from
some drummer wishing to be conveyed to the Bigelow House. Only
outlanders pay money for hacks in Radville; everybody else walks, of
course. Naturally Tracey took The Mysterious Stranger for a drummer; he
had three trunks and a heavy packing-box, so Tracey's misapprehension
was pardonable. Instinctively he drove him to the Bigelow House; Will
now and again makes Tracey a present of a bottle of sarsaparilla or
lemon-pop, with the result that Tracey calls Tannehill, who runs the
opposition hotel, a skinflint and never takes strangers there except on
their express desire. The Mysterious Stranger merely asked to be driven
to the best hotel. This is not like most commercial travellers, who as
a rule know where they want to go, even in a strange town, having made
inquiry in advance from their brothers of the road. Tracey made a note
of this, and is further on record as having observed that this stranger
was rather better dressed than the run of drummers, if not so nobbily.
Moreover, he was reticent under the cross-fire of Tracey's
irrepressible conversation, and failed to ask the name of the first
pretty girl they passed; who happened to be Angle Tuthill. Finally The
Mysterious Stranger actually tipped Tracey a whole quarter for carrying
his suit-case into the hotel office.

With these incitements it would have been unreasonable to expect Tracey
to do otherwise than linger around for the good health of his sense of
inquisitiveness, which would else have been severely sprained.

Will Bigelow was dozing behind the desk, lulled by the sound of Hi
Nutt's voice in the barroom, as he explained to all and sundry just how
he had inadvertently permitted Watty the tailor to best him at checkers
that morning. Otherwise the office was deserted. Tracey wakened Will by
stamping heavily across the floor, and Will mechanically pushed down
his spectacles and dipped a pen in ink, slewing the register round for
the guest's signature. He says he knew at a glance that The Mysterious
Stranger was no travelling man, but this is a moot point, Tracey's
memory being minutely accurate and at variance with Will's assertion.

The Mysterious Stranger was a young man, rather severely clothed in a
dark suit which excited no interest in Bigelow's understanding,
although I, when I saw him later, had no difficulty in realising that
it had never been made by a tailor whose place of business was more
than five doors removed from Fifth Avenue. He was tallish, but not
really tall, and carried himself with a slight stoop which took way
from his real height. Tracey says he had a way of looking at you as if
he was smiling inside at some joke he'd heard a long time ago; and I
don't know but that's a fairly apt description of his ordinary
expression. He had a way, too, of nodding jerkily at you--just once--to
show he recognised you or understood what you were driving at; at other
times he carried his head a trifle to one side and slightly forward. He
was a man you wouldn't forget, somehow, though what there was about him
that was remarkable nobody seemed to know.

He nodded that jerky way in answer to Will Bigelow's "G'devenin'," and
without saying anything took the pen and started to register. He had to
stop, however, for Tracey was pressing him so close upon the right that
he couldn't get any play for his elbow, and after a minute or two he
asked Tracey politely would he mind stepping round to the left, where
he could see just as well. So Tracey did. Then he wrote his name in a
good round hand: "Nathaniel Duncan, N.Y."

"I'd like a room with a bath," he told Will: "something simple and
chaste, within the means of a man in moderate circumstances."

Will thought he was joking at first, but he didn't smile, so Will
explained that there was a bathroom on the third floor at the end of
the hall, though there wasn't much call for it. "I could give you a
room next to that," he said, "but you wouldn't want it, I guess."

"Why not?" asked The Mysterious Stranger.

"Because," said Will, "'taint near the sample-room."

"That doesn't make any difference; I'm on the wagon."

The only sense Will could get out of that was that the young man was
travelling for a buggy house and hadn't brought any samples with him.
"I thought," he allowed, "as how you'd be wantin' a place to display
your samples, but of course if you're in the wagon business--"

"Oh," said Mr. Duncan, "I thought you meant the 'sample-room' over
there." He nodded toward the bar. "That's what you call the
dispensaries of intoxicating liquors in this part of the country, is it
not?"

Will made a noise resembling an affirmative, and as soon as he got his
breath explained that travelling men generally wanted a sort of a
showroom next to theirs and that that was called a sample-room, too.

"But I'm not a travelling man," said The Mysterious Stranger. "So I
shall have as little use for the one as the other."

"Then the room on the third floor'll do for you," said Will. "How long
do you calculate on stayin'?"

"That will depend," said Mr. Duncan: "a day or so--perhaps longer;
until I can find comfortable and more permanent quarters."

In his amazement Will jabbed the pen so hard into the potato beside the
ink-well that he never could get the nib out and had to buy a new one.
"You don't mean to say you're thinkin' of coming here to live?" he
gasped.

"Yes, I do," said the young man apologetically. "I don't think you'll
find me in the way. I shall be very quiet and unobtrusive. I'm a
student, looking for a quiet place in which to pursue my studies."

"Well," said Will, "you've found it all right. There ain't no quieter
place in Pennsylvany than Radville, Mr. Duncan. I hope you'll like it,"
he said, sarcastic.

"I shall endeavour to," said the young man.

"And now may I go to my room, please? I should like to renovate my
travel-stained person to some extent before dinner."

"You'll have time," said Will; "dinner's at noon to-morrow. I guess
you're thinkin' about supper. That's ready now. Here, Tracey, you carry
this gentleman's things up to number forty-three."

But Tracey had already gone, and such was his haste to spread the news
that he forgot to take the horse and surrey back to the stable, but
left it standing in front of the hotel till eight o'clock; for which
oversight, I am credibly informed, his father justly dealt with him
before sending him to bed.

I have never been able to understand how we failed to hear of it at
Miss Carpenter's before seven o'clock. That was the hour when, having
finished supper and my first evening pipe, I started down-town to the
_Citizen_ office, intending to stop in at the Bigelow House on the
way and confound Will with the list of the day's happenings. Main
Street was pretty well crowded for that hour, I remember noticing, and
most of the townsfolk were grouped together on the corners, underneath
the lamps, discussing something rather excitedly. I paid no particular
attention, realising that between Caesar, Pete Willing, Roland
Burnette's suit and the checker game, they had enough to talk about. So
it wasn't until I walked into the Bigelow House office that I either
heard or saw anything of The Mysterious Stranger.

Will Bigelow was in his usual place behind the desk, and looked, I
thought, rather disgruntled. His reply to my "Howdy, Will?" sounded
somewhat snappish. But he got out of his chair and moved round the end
of the desk just as the young man came out of the dining-room door.
Then Will pulled up and I realised that he was calling my attention to
the stranger.

So far as I could see, he seemed an ordinary, everyday, good-looking,
good-natured young man, whose naturally sunny disposition had been
insulted by the food recently set before him. He wandered listlessly
out upon the porch and stood there, with his hands in his pockets,
looking up and down Centre Street, just then being shadowed into the
warm, purple June dusk, beneath its double row of elms. We've always
thought it a rather attractive street, and that night it seemed
especially lively with its trickle of girls and boys strolling up and
down, and the groups of grown folks on the corners, and Roland
Burnette's summer suit conspicuous through Sothern and Lee's
plate-glass windows; and I supposed the young man was admiring it all.
But now I know him better. He felt just the same about Main Street,
corner of Centre, Radville, as I should have about Broadway and
Forty-second Street, New York, if you had set me down there and told me
I'd got to get accustomed to the idea that I must live there. He was
saying, deep down in his heart: "O _Lord_!"--with the rising
inflection.

Will grabbed my arm, without saying anything, and pulled me into the
bar.

"Hello!" I said, as he went round behind and opened the cigar-case,
"what's up?"

He took out two boxes of the finest five-centers in town and placed
them before me. "Them's up," he said. "You win. Have one."

It staggered me to have him give in that way; I had been looking
forward to a long and diverting dispute. "I guess you've heard
everything worth hearing about to-day's history," I said, disappointed,
as I selected the least unpleasant looking of the cigars.

"No, I haven't," he said. "I didn't have to hear anything. What earned
you that smoke took place right here in this office.... Here," he said,
striking a match for me.

I had been trying to put the cigar away so that I might dispose of it
without hurting Will's feelings, but he had me, so I recklessly poked
the thing into the automatic clipper and then into my mouth. "What do
you mean?" I asked, puffing.

"Come 'long outside," said Will; and we went out on the porch just in
time to see Mr. Duncan going wearily upstairs to his room. "I mean,"
said Will, _"him"_. And then he told me all about it.

"But things like that don't happen every day," he wound up defensively.
"I'll go you another cigar on to-morrow."

"No, you won't," I said indignantly; and furtively dropped the infamous
thing over the railing.

I am never successful in my little attempts at deception, even in
self-defence. In all candour I believe my disposition of that cigar
would have gone undetected but for my notorious bad luck. Of course
Bigelow's setter, Pompey, had to be asleep right under the spot where I
dropped the cigar, and equally of course the burning end had to make
instantaneous connection with his nerve centres, via his hide, with such
effect that he arose in agony and subsequently used coarse language.
Investigation naturally discovered my empty-handed perfidy. To no one
else in Radville would this have happened.

On the other hand, no one else in Radville would have thrown away the
cigar.




V


MARGARET'S DAUGHTER

Discomfort roused Duncan from his rest at an early hour, the morning
following his arrival in Radville. I must confess that the beds in the
Bigelow House are no better than they should be; in fact, according to
Duncan, not so good. Duncan ought to know; he has slept in one of them,
or tried to; a trial thus far to me denied. From what he has said,
however, I shudder to think what will become of me should I ever lose
the shelter of Miss Carpenter's second-story front and be thrown out
into a heartless world to choose between the Bigelow House and Frank
Tannehill's Radville Inn....

Duncan arose and consulted the two-dollar watch which he had left on
the pine washstand by the window. It was half-past seven o'clock, and
that seemed early to him. He was tired and would willingly have turned
in again, but a rueful glance at the couch of his night-long vigil
sufficed him. He lifted a hand to Heaven and vowed solemnly: "Never
again!"

As he bent over the washstand and poured a cupful of water into the
china basin, thus emptying the pitcher, he was conscious of a pain in
his back; but a thought cheered him. "They must have decent stables in
this town," he considered, brightening. "The haymows for mine, after
this."

He dressed with scrupulous care, mindful of Kellogg's parting words,
the sense of which was that first impressions were most important. "All
the same," Duncan thought, "I don't believe they count in a dead-and-
alive place like this. There's no one here with sufficient animation to
realise I'm in town." This shows how little he understood our little
community. A day of enlightenment was in store for him.

Pansy Murphy was scrubbing out the office when he came down for
breakfast. She is large, of what is known as a full complexion,
good-hearted and energetic. His pause at the foot of the stairs, as he
surveyed in dismay the seven seas of soapy water that occupied the
floor, aroused her. She sat back suddenly on her heels and looked her
fill of him, with her blue Irish eyes very wide, and her mouth a trap.
He bowed politely. Pansy saved herself from falling over backwards by a
supreme effort, scrubbed her hair out of her eyes with a very wet hand,
and gave him "Good-marrin', Misther Dooncan," in a brogue as rich as
you could wish for.

He started violently. "Heavens!" he said. "I am discovered!"

"Make yer moind aisy about thot," Pansy assured him. "'Tis known all
over town who ye arre, what's yer name, how manny troonks ye've brought
wid ye, and th' rayson f'r yer comin' here."

"A comforting thought, thank you," he commented: "to awake to find
one's self grown famous over-night!..."

"Now ye know," she returned, emboldened, "what it is to be a big toad
in a small puddle."

"I thank you." He nodded again, with a comprehensive survey of the
reeking floor. "I'm afraid I do." With which he slipped and slid over
to and through the swinging wicker doors of the dining-room.

It was deserted. From the negligee of the tables, littered with the
plates and dishes, dreary survivors of a dozen breakfasts, he divined
that he was the tardiest guest in the household. A slatternly young
woman in a soiled shirt-waist--the waitress--received him with great
calm and waved him toward a table by the window, where an unused cover
was laid. He went meekly, dogged by her formidable presence. She stood
over him and glared down.

"Haman neggs," she said defiantly, "steakan nomlette."

"I'll be a martyr," he told her civilly. "Me for the steak."

She frowned gloomily and tramped away. He folded his hands and, cheered
by an appetising aroma of warm water and yellow soap from the office,
considered the prospect from the window by his side. Three children and
a yellow dog came along and watched him do it, dispassionately
reviewing his points in clear young voices. Tracey Tanner ambled into
view on the other side of the street and beamed at him generously, his
round red face resembling, Duncan thought, more than anything else a
summer sun rising through mist. Josie Lockwood (he was to discover her
name later) passed with her pert little nose ostentatiously pointed
away from him; none the less he detected a gleam in the corner of her
eye.... Others went by, singly or in groups, all more or less openly
interested in him.

He tried to look unconscious, but with ill success. There was nothing
particularly engaging in the view: the broad, dusty street lined with
commonplace structures of "frame" and brick, glowing in the morning
sunshine. There were, to be sure, cool shadows beneath the trees, but
the suggestion was all of summer heat. There was a watering-trough and
hitching-rail directly opposite, a little to one side of Hemmenway's
feed-store, and there a well-fed mare stood, drooping dejectedly
between the shafts of a dilapidated buggy. On the corner was a
two-storey brick building with large plate-glass windows on the ground
floor for the display of intimate articles of feminine apparel. The
black and gold sign above proclaimed it: "The Fair. Dry Goods &
Notions. Leonard & Call." Duncan considered it with grave respect. "The
scene of my future activities," he observed.

By this time his audience had become too large and friendly for his
endurance. He rose and retired to a less public table.

In her own good time the waitress returned with a plate, and a small
oval platter in one hand and a cup of coffee in the other. She placed
them before him with a manner that told him plainly he could never make
himself the master of her affections. The small oval platter was
discovered to contain a small segment of dark-brown ham and two fried
eggs swimming in grease.

Duncan questioned the woman with mute, appealing eyes.

"Steak's run out," she told him curtly.

"Leaving no address?" he inquired with forced gaiety.

A suppressed smile softened her austerity, and she turned away to hide
it. "To think," he wondered, "that a sense of humour should inhabit
that!" He broke a roll and munched it gloomily, pondering this
revelation. "And such humour !" he added, with justice.

After an interval the woman returned. He had refrained from the staple
dish. She indicated it with a grimy forefinger.

"Please!" he begged plaintively. "I'm never very hungry in the
morning."

"I guess you don't like the table here," she observed icily, clearing
away.

"Do you?"

"I don't have to; I live home."

He stared. Could it be possible...?

"I know a good old one, too," he ventured hopefully. "Now here." He
drew his coffee cup toward him and began to stir with energy. "You say:
'It looks like rain'; and I'll say: 'Yes, but it tastes a little like
coffee.'"

She clattered away indignantly. He rose, depressed, and sighing sought
the outer air.

In the course of a forenoon's stroll Radville discovered itself to him
in all its squalor and its loveliness. It sits in the centre of a broad
valley of rolling meadow-land, studded with infrequent homesteads,
broken into rather extensive farms, threaded by a shallow silver stream
that gives its all in tribute to the Susquehanna far in the south. The
barrier mountains rise about it like the sides of a bowl, with a great
V-shaped piece chipped out of the southern wall. This break we call the
Gap; through it the railroad comes to us, through it the river escapes.
The hills rear high and steep, their swelling flanks cloaked in sombre
green and grey, with here and there a bald spot like a splash of ochre
where there's been a landslide, climbing directly from the plain, with
no foothills. A recluse, I have thought, must have chosen this spot for
a town site; sickened of the world, he sought seclusion--and found it
here to his heart's content. Until the coke-ovens come, following the
miners, with their attendant hordes of Slovaks, Poles and Hungarians,
we shall be near to God, for we shall know peace....

The town has been laid out with great rectangularity; the river divides
it unequally. On the western bank is the larger community--locally, the
Old Town, retaining its characteristics of sobriety, quiet and comfort;
here, also, is the business centre--such business as there is. Here
Duncan found homely residences sitting back from the street in ample
grounds--grounds, perhaps, not very carefully groomed, but in spite of
that attractive and pleasant to the eye. With one or two exceptions,
none were strongly suggestive of wealth. He detected a trace of
ostentation, and no taste whatever, in Lockwood's new villa (I'm told
that's the polite designation for the edifice he caused to be erected
what time the plague of riches smote him and the old home on Cherry
Street became too small for the collective family chest), and there was
quiet dignity in the quaintly columned facade of the Bohun mansion, now
occupied solely by old Colonel Bohun, lonely and testy, reputed the
richest as well as the most miserable man in the county. But as to his
wealth, I doubt if rumour runs by more than tradition; Blinky
Lockwood's new-found hundred-thousands are growing rapidly toward the
million mark, unless Blinky's a worse business man than the town takes
him to be.

An old stone arch (whereon lovers linger in the moonlight) spans the
stream and links the Old Town with the new, which we sometimes term the
Flats, but more often simply Over There. It is a sordid huddle of dingy
and down-at-the-heel tenements, housing the poorer working classes and
the frankly worthless and ruffianly riff-raff of the neighbourhood.
There are eight gin-mills Over There as against two sample-rooms in the
Old Town, and of the local constabulary two-thirds lead exciting lives
patrolling the Flats; the remaining third is ordinarily to be found
dozing in the backroom of Schwartz's, and if roused will answer to the
name and title of Pete Willing, Sheriff and Chief of Police.

Duncan reviewed both sides of the municipal face with fine
impartiality--the Flats last; and turned back to the Old Town. "There's
one thing," he communed as he reached the bridge: "If these people ever
find me out they'll run me across the river--sure."

He paused there, looking up and down the valley with contemplative
gaze; and it was there I found him.

As is my custom, I had devoted the earlier morning hours to the
compilation of that work which is to gain for the name of Littlejohn a
trifle more respect than, I fear, it owns in Radville nowadays; and
afterwards, again in accordance with habit, had started out for my
morning constitutional. As I was about to leave the house Miss
Carpenter waylaid me and, in a voice still tremulous from the shock of
yesterday, asked me to hunt up Jake Sawyer in the Flats and tell him to
come and cut the grass.

I was not in the least unwilling, for the walk was not long, and the
morning very pleasant--not too warm, and bright with the smiling spirit
of June. I don't remember feeling more cheerful and at peace with the
world than when I marched off on my mission. The cloud I might, of
course, have anticipated: clouds always come, and a lifetime has taught
me to be sceptical of that tale about the silver lining. And even when
it came it seemed no more depressing, of no more significant moment,
than the cloud shadow that scurries across a wheat-field with no effect
other than to enhance the beauty of the sunshine that pursues it.

Old Colonel Bohun was the cloud-shadow of that morning. I met him
turning into Main Street from Mortimer--at the head of which his
mansion stands. He came down the sidewalk, but with a hint of haste in
his manner: a tall old man, bending beneath the burden of his years,
his fierce old face and iron-grey hair shaded as always by the black
slouch hat with the flapping brim, his rounded shoulders cloaked with
the black Inverness cape he wore summer and winter. In spite of his age
and evident decrepitude, he bodied forth the spirit of what he had
been, and none could pass him without knowledge of his presence; he
drew eyes as a magnet draws filings, and drawing, held them in respect.
I doubted if there were a man in Radville who could meet the old
colonel with anything but a mingling of fear and deference--with one or
two exceptions. For myself I hated him heartily, and he, looking down
at me from the peak of pride whereon his iron soul perched, despised me
with equal intensity. So we got along famously at our infrequent
encounters.

This morning I caught a flash of fire from his red-rimmed old eyes, and
told myself I was sorry for whoever crossed his path before he returned
to his lonely castle. It was his habit at odd intervals to foray down
the village streets with one grievance or another rankling in his
bosom, seeking some unlucky one upon whose head to wreak his
resentment. We had come to recognise the heavy, slow tapping of his
thick cane as a harbinger of trouble, even as you might prognosticate a
thunderstorm from the rumbling beneath the horizon.

I saw he recognised me and gave him a civil salute, which he returned
with a brusque nod and a sharper, "Good-morning, Littlejohn," as he
passed. Then he swung into Main Street, paralleling my course on the
opposite sidewalk, and went _thump-thumping_ along, darting quick
glances hither and yon beneath his heavy brows, like some dark
incarnation of perverse pride and passion.

Partly because the sight of him sensibly influenced my mood, and partly
because inevitably he made me think of Sam Graham, I turned off at
Beech Street, leaving him to pursue his way toward the centre of town.
Graham's one-horse drug-store stood on Beech, a block south of Main.
That being the least promising location in town for a business of any
sort, Sam had naturally selected it when he concluded to set up shop.
If Sam had ever in his life displayed any symptoms of business
sagacity, Radville would never have recovered from the shock. I believe
it was Legrand Gunn, our only really certificated village wit, who
coined the epigram: "As useless as to take a prescription to Graham's."
The implication being that Graham didn't carry sufficient stock to
fill any prescription; which was largely true; he couldn't; he hadn't
the money to stock up with. What little he took in from time to time
went in part to the support of Betty and himself, but mainly to pay
interest on his debts and buy raw materials for models of his
thousand-and-one inventions. Most Radvillians firmly believed that Sam
has at some time or other in his busy, worthless career invented
everything under the sun, practicable or impracticable--the former
always a few days after somebody else had taken out patents for the
identical device. But at that time no one believed he would ever make a
cent out of any one of the children of his ingenious brain; nor was I,
in this respect, more credulous than any of my fellow-townsmen.

I lingered a moment outside the shop, thinking of the change that had
come over it since the death of Margaret Graham, Betty's mother. For,
despite its out-of-the-way location, the shop had not always been
unprofitable; while Margaret lived (my heart still ached with the
memory of her name) Sam's business had prospered. She had been one of
those woman who can rise to any emergency in the interest of her loved
ones; the first to realise Sam's improvidence and lack of executive
ability, she had taken hold of the business with a firm hand and made
it pay--while she lived. It has never ceased to be a source of
wondering speculation to me, that she, with her gentle training, so
wholly aloof from every thought of commerce or economy, should have
proven herself so thorough and level-headed a business woman. There's
no accounting for it, indeed, save on the theory that she conceived it
a woman's function to make up for man's deficiencies; Sam needed her,
so she become his wife; he needed a manager, so she had became that
also....

During Margaret's regime, as I say, the shop had thrived. Sam had few
ill-wishers in Radville; the trade came his way. Then Betty was born
and Margaret died....

Most of this I have on hearsay. I left Radville shortly after their
marriage and did not return until some months after Margaret's burial.
By that time the shop had begun to show signs of neglect; its stock was
decimated, its trade likewise. Sam was struggling with his inventions
more fiercely than ever--seeking forgetfulness, I always thought. The
business was allowed to take care of itself. He had always a serene
faith in his tomorrows.

Now the little shop had been far distanced by the competition of
Sothern and Lee. It was twenty years behind the times, as the saying
is. Small, darksome, dreary and dingy, it served chiefly as a
living-room for Sam, his daughter, and his cronies, as well as for his
workshop. He had a bench and a ramshackle lathe in one corner, where
you might be sure to find him futilely pottering at almost any hour. He
owned the little building--or that portion in it which it were a farce
to term the equity above the mortgage--and Betty kept house for him in
three rooms above the store.

I saw nothing of him as I stepped across the street, and was wondering
if he were at home when, through the small, dark panes of glass in his
show windows I discerned his white old head bobbing busily over
something on the rear counter. I pushed the door open and entered. He
looked up with his never-failing smile of welcome and a wave of his
hand.

"Howdy, Homer? Come in. Well, well, I'm glad to see you. Sit down--I
think that chair there by the stove will hold together under you."

"What are you doing, Sam?" I asked.

"Fixin' up the sody fountain. 'Meant to get it working last month,
Homer, but somehow I kind of forgot."

He rubbed away briskly at the single faucet which protruded above the
counter, lathering it briskly with a metal polish that smelt to Heaven.

"Do much sody trade, Sam?"

He paused, passing his worn old fingers reflectively across a chin
snowy with a stubble of neglected beard. "No," he allowed thoughtfully,
"not so much as we used to, now that Sothern and Lee've got this
new-fangled notion of puttin' ice cream in a nickel glass of sody. Most
of the young folks go there, now, but still I get a call flow and
then--and every little bit helps." He rubbed on ferociously for a
moment. "'Course, I'd do more, likely, if I carried a bigger line of
flavours."

"How many do you carry?"

"One," he admitted with a sigh, "vanilly."

While I filled my pipe he continued to rub very industriously.

"Why don't you get more?"

He flashed me one of his pale, genial smiles. "I'm thinkin' of it,
Homer, soon's I get some money in. Next week, mebbe. There's a man in
N'York that mebbe can be int'rested in one of my inventions, Roland
Barnette says. Mebbe he'd be willin' to put a little money in it,
Roland says, and of course if he does, I'll be able to stock up
considerable."

I sighed covertly for him. He rubbed, humming a tuneless rhythm to
himself.

"Roland's goin' to write to him about it."

"What invention?" I asked, incredulous.

Sam put down his bottle of polish and came round the counter, beaming;
nothing pleases him better than an opportunity to exhibit some one of
his innumerable models. "I'll show you, Homer," he volunteered
cheerfully, shuffling over to his work-bench. He rasped a match over
its surface and applied the flame to a small gas-bracket fixed to the
wall. A strong rush of gas extinguished the match, and he turned the
flow half off before trying again. This time the vapour caught and
settled to a steady, brilliant flame as white as and much softer than
acetylene.

"There!" he said in triumph. "What d'ye think of that, Homer?"

"Why," I said, "I didn't know you had an acetylene plant."

"No more have I, Homer."

"But what is that, then?" I demanded.

"It's my invention," he returned proudly.

"I've been workin' on it two years, Homer, and only got it goin'
yestiddy. It's going to be a great thing, I tell you."

"But what _is_ it, Sam?"

"It's gas from crude petroleum, Homer. See ..." he continued,
indicating a tank beneath the bench which seemed to be connected with
the bracket by a very simple system of piping, broken by a smaller,
cylindrical tank. "Ye put the oil in there--just crude, as it comes out
of the wells, Homer; it don't need refinin'--and it runs through this
and down here to this, where it's vaporised--much the same's they
vaporise gasoline for autymobile engines, ye know--and then it just
naturally flows up to the bracket--and there ye are."

"It's wonderful, Sam," said I, wondering if it really were.

"And the best part of it is the economy, Homer. A gallon will run one
jet six weeks, day in and out. And simple to install. I tell ye--"

"Have you got it patented yet?"

"Yes, siree! took out patents just as soon as it struck me how simple
it 'ud be--more than two years ago. Only, of course, it took time to
work it out just right, 'specially when I had to stop now and then
'cause I needed money for materials. But it's all right now, Homer,
it's all right now."

"And you say Roland Barnette's writing to some one in New York about
it?"

"Yes; he promised he would. I explained it to Roland and he seemed real
int'rested. He's kind, very kind."

I was inclined to doubt this, and would probably have said something to
that effect had not a shadow crossing the window brought me to my feet
in consternation. But before I could do more than rise, Colonel Bohun
had flung open the door and stamped in. He stopped short at sight of
me, misguided by his near-sighted eyes, and singled me out with a
threatening wave of his heavy stick.

"Well, sir!" he snarled. "I've come for my answer. Have you sense
enough in your addled pate to understand that, man? I've come for my
answer!"

"And may have it, whatever it may be, for all of me," I told him.

His face flushed a deeper red. "Oh, it's only you, is it, Littlejohn? I
took you for that fool Graham, in this damned dark hole. Where is he?"

I looked to Graham and he followed the direction of my gaze to the
work-bench, where Sam stood with his back to it, his worn hands folded
quietly before him. He seemed a little whiter than usual, I thought;
and perhaps it was only my fancy that made him appear to tremble ever
so slightly. For he was quite calm and self-possessed--so much so that
I realised for the first time there was another man in Radville besides
myself who did not fear old Colonel Bohun.

"I'm here, colonel," he said quietly. "What is it you wish?"

The colonel swung on him, shaking with passion. But he held his tongue
until he had mastered himself somewhat: a feat of self-restraint on his
part over which I marvel to this day.

"You know well, Graham," he said presently. "You got my letter--the
letter I wrote you a week ago?"

"Yes," said Sam, with a start of comprehension. "Yes, I got it."

"Then why the devil, man, don't you answer it?"

Sam's apologetic smile sweetened his face.

"Why," he said haltingly--"I'm sure I meant no offence, but--you see,
I'm a very busy man--I forgot it."

"The hell you forgot it. D'ye expect me to believe that, man?"

"I'm afraid you'll have to."

Bohun was speechless for a moment, stricken dumb by a second seizure of
fury. But again he calmed himself.

"Very well. I'll swallow that insolence for the present--"

"It wasn't meant as such, I assure--"

"Don't interrupt me! D'you hear? ... I've come for my answer. Yes, I've
come down to that, Graham. If you can't accord me the common courtesy
of a written reply--I've come to hear it from your mouth."

Sam nodded thoughtfully. "Mebbe," he said, "you forgot you have failed
to accord me the common courtesy of any sort of a communication
whatever for twenty years, Colonel Bohun. Even when my wife, your
daughter, died, you ignored my message asking you to her funeral...."

"Be silent!" screamed the colonel. "Do you think I'm here to bandy
words with you, fool? I demand my answer."

"And as for that," continued Sam as evenly as if he had not been
interrupted, "your proposition was so preposterous that it could have
come only from you, and deserved no answer. But since you want it
formally, sir, it's no."

For a moment I feared Bohun would have a stroke. The back of the chair
I had just vacated and his stick alone supported him through that dumb,
terrible transport. He shook so violently that I looked momentarily to
see the chair break beneath him. There was insanity in his eyes. When
finally he was able to articulate it was in broken gasps.

"I don't believe it," he stammered. "It's a lie. I don't believe it.
It's madness--the girl wouldn't be so mad. ..."

"What is it, father?"

I don't know which of us three was the more startled by that simple
question in Betty Graham's voice; Sam, at all events, showed the least
surprise; the old colonel wheeled toward the back of the store, his jaw
dropping and his eyes protruding as though he were confronted with a
ghost. As, in a way, he was: even I had been struck by that strange,
heartrending similarity to her mother's tone; and even I trembled a
little to hear that voice, as it seemed, from beyond the grave.

Betty stood at the foot of the staircase; alarmed by the noise of the
colonel's raging, she had stolen down, unheard by any of us. And in
that moment I realised as never before that the girl had more of her
mother in her than lay in that marvellous reproduction of Margaret
Graham's voice. As she waited there one detected in her pose something
of her mother's quiet dignity, in her eyes more than a little of
Margaret's tragedy. Of Margaret's beauty I saw scant trace, I own; but
in those days my eyes were blinded by the signs of overwork and
insufficient nourishment that marred her young features, by the
hopeless dowdiness of her garments.

Abruptly she moved swiftly to her father's side and slipped her hand
into his. "What is it, father?" she repeated, eyeing Colonel Bohun
coldly.

I thought Sam's eyes filled. His lips trembled and he had to struggle
to master his voice. He smiled through it all, tenderly at his girl,
but there was in that smile the weakness of the child grown old, the
dependence of the man whose womanfolk must ever mother him.

"Why, Betty," he said, tremulous--"why, Betty, your grandfather here
has been kind enough to offer to take you and educate you and make a
lady of you, and--and we were just talking it over, dear, just talking
it over."

"Do you mean that?" she flung at Bohun.

He straightened up and held himself well in hand. "Is it the first you
have heard of it?"

"Yes." She looked inquiringly at her father.

"Why didn't you tell her?" Bohun persisted harshly. "Were you afraid?"

"No." Sam shook his head slowly. "I wasn't
afraid. But it was unnecessary.... You see, Betty, Colonel Bohun is
willing to do all this for you on several conditions. You must leave me
and never see me again; you mustn't even recognise me should we meet
upon the street; you must change your name to Bohun and never permit
yourself to be known as Betty Graham. Then you must--"

"Never mind, daddy dear," said the girl. "That is enough. I know now--I
understand why you never told me. It's impossible. Colonel Bohun knew
that when he made the offer, of course; he made it simply to harass
you, daddy. It's his revenge...."

She looked Bohun up and down with a glance of contempt that would have
withered another man, poor, wan, haggard little maid of all work that
she was.

"And that's your answer, miss?" he snapped, livid with wrath.

"I would not," she told him slowly, "accept a favour from you, sir, if
I were starving...."

Bohun drew himself up. "Then starve," he told her; and walked out of
the shop.

I gaped after his retreating figure. It seemed impossible, incredible,
that he should have taken such an answer without yielding to a fit of
insensate passion. And I was still marvelling when I heard Graham
saying in a broken voice: "Betty! Betty, my little girl!"

Then I, too, went away, with a mist before my eyes to dim the golden
grace of June.




VI


INTRODUCTION TO MISS CARPENTER

On my way back from the Flats I discovered Duncan sitting on the wall
of the bridge, moodily donating pebbles to the water. His attitude
suggested preoccupation with unhappy reflections, a humour from which
the sound of my footsteps roused him. He looked up and caught my eye
with an uncertain nod, as though he half recognised me--presumably
having casually noticed me at the Bigelow House the previous evening.

"Good-morning," said I cheerfully, with a slight break in my stride
intended craftily to convey the impression that I was not altogether
averse to a pause for gossip.

He said "Good-morning," sombrely.

"A pleasant day," I observed spontaneously, stopping.

"Yes," he agreed. "By the way, have you a match about you?"

I searched my pockets, found a box and handed it over.

"I've been perishing for a ..." He slid his fingers into a waistcoat
pocket, as one who should seek a cigarette-case; but the hand came
forth empty. He bit his remark off abruptly, with a blank look in his
eyes which was promptly succeeded by an expression of deepest chagrin.
He got up and with a little bow returned the box.

"I forgot," he said, apologetic.

"I'm afraid I can't help you out," said I.

"Oh, that's all right. I'd just forgotten that I don't smoke."

I pretended not to notice his disconcertion.

"You're to be congratulated; it's a shameful waste of time and money."

"A filthy habit," said he warmly.

"Indeed, yes," I chanted, finding my pipe and tobacco pouch.

He caught my twinkle as I filled and lighted, and looked away, the
shadow of a smile lurking beneath his small, closely clipped moustache.

"I beg your pardon," he said a moment later, regarding me with more
interest, "but--do you live here?"

"Certainly. Why?"

"I was sure of it," he replied soberly. "But don't you feel a bit
lonesome, sometimes?"

"Not in the least. Radville's one of the most interesting places on
this side of the footstool." He sighed. "Indeed," I insisted, "you
won't feel any more lonely after you've lived here a while, than I do
now, Mr. Duncan."

He opened his eyes at my acquaintance with his name, but jerked his
head at me comprehendingly.

"To be sure," he said. "You would know. But I'm only beginning to
realise what it feels like to be a marked man."

"I hear you intend to make Radville your permanent residence, Mr.
Duncan?"

"It's part of the system," he said obscurely. "It may prove a life
sentence."

"Don't you think you'll like it here?"

"Oh, I'm strong for Radville," he declared earnestly. "It's all to the
merry ... I beg your pardon."

I stared curiously to see him colour like a school-girl. "What for?"

"My mistake, sir; I forgot myself again. I don't use slang."

"Oh!" I commented, wondering. He was beginning to puzzle me.

In the pause the air began to rock with the heavy clanging of the clock
in the Methodist Church steeple.

"That's noon," I said. "We'll have to cut along: dinner's ready."

Duncan immediately replanted himself firmly upon the parapet. "I know
it," he said with some indignation.

Again bewildered, I hesitated, but eventually advanced: "Our ways run
together, Mr. Duncan, as far as the Bigelow House. My name is
Littlejohn--Homer Littlejohn."

He rose again to take my hand and assured me he was glad to make my
acquaintance. "But," he added morosely, "I'll be damned if I go back to
that hotel before dinner's over.... Great Scott! I forgot again. I
don't swear!"

"Have you any other unnatural accomplishments?" I inquired, chuckling.

"I'm so full of 'em I can hardly stick," he assented gloomily. "I don't
drink or smoke or swear or play pool or cards, and on Sundays I go to
church."

I laughed outright. "You've come to the right place for such exemplary
virtues to be fully appreciated, Mr. Duncan."

"That's all right," he said with a return of his indignation, "but it
wasn't in the bargain that I should starve to death. Do you realise,
Mr. Littlejohn," he continued, warming, "that you behold in me a young
man in the prime of health actually on the point of wasting visibly
away to a shadow of my former hardy self? It's a fact: I am. For the
past two days I've had nothing to eat except railway sandwiches and
coffee and the kind of fodder they pitchfork you at the Bigelow House.
And I came here with a mind coloured with rosy anticipations of real
old-fashioned country cooking. It's an outrage!"

"Look here," said I: "why not come home with me for dinner? I'll be
glad to have you, and Miss Carpenter won't mind your coming, I'm sure."

He got up with alacrity. "Those are the first human words I've heard in
Radville, sir! I accept with joy and gratitude. Come--lead me to it!"

Now, Miss Carpenter doesn't like her meals delayed; so I would have
been inclined to hasten this Mr. Duncan; but he saved me the trouble.

"Miss Carpenter?" he asked without warning, as we hurried up Main
Street.

"My landlady, Mr. Duncan."

"She takes boarders? An old maid?" he persisted eagerly.

"An elderly spinster; boarders are her distraction as well as a source
of income."

"Do you think she'd take me in, Mr. Littlejohn?"

"I'm sure of it. There's a vacant room ..."

"Does she talk?"

"Moderately."

"Not a regular walking newspaper--no?"

"Not exactly--"

"Then I'm afraid it's no use," he sighed.

I glanced up at his face, but it was inscrutable.

"You--you want a landlady who talks?" I gasped, incredulous.

"It's one of the rules," he said, again obscurely.

I could make nothing of him. And had I any right to introduce to Hetty
Carpenter a guest who came without credentials and talked more or less
like a lunatic at large?

"Mr. Duncan--" I began, uncomfortable.

"Don't say it," he anticipated me. "I know you think I'm crazy--but I'm
not. You would think so, naturally, because you're the only man here
who's ever lived away from Radville long enough--not counting those who
went to the World's Fair--."

"How did you know?"

"Bigelow told me last night; said you'd be glad to meet somebody from
New York. I hope he's right. I'm glad, personally.... You see--May I
request that you regard this as confidential?"

"Yes--yes!"

"I've come to Radville to make my fortune."

The confession smote me witless: I could only gape. He nodded
confirmation, with a most serious mien. At length I found strength to
articulate. "From New York--?"

"Yes. It's a new scheme. You see, Mr. Littlejohn,
matters have come to such a state that a city-bred boy practically
doesn't stand any show on earth of making good in the cities; your
country-bred boys crowd him to the wall, nine times out of ten. They
invade us in hordes, fresh from the open, strong, vigorous,
clear-headed, ambitious.... What chance have we got? ... I've been
figuring it out, you see, and I've come to the conclusion that it's my
only salvation to get back to the country and improve some of the
opportunities--the golden opportunities--that your boys have neglected,
overlooked, in their mad desire to invade the commercial centres of the
country."

He seemed very much in earnest; I was watching him as closely as I
might without making my scrutiny offensive; and there seemed to be the
ring of conviction in his voice, while the expression of his eyes
indicated concentrated thought. And how was I to know, then, that the
concentration was due to the necessity of invention?

"You follow me, Mr. Littlejohn?"

"I was here first," I corrected. "Still, there's more in what you say
than perhaps you realise."

"If I'd made this discovery originally I'd agree with you, sir. But,
quite to the contrary, it was pointed out to me by one of the shrewdest
business minds in the United States--a man who'd been a country boy to
begin with. And I've come to the conclusion that he's right."

"So you're here."

"Here I am."

"And what do you propose doing?"

"I'm reading law, Mr. Littlejohn; that I shall continue. In the
meantime, I shall keep my eyes open. At any day, at any amount, the
opportunity may present itself, the opportunity I'm looking for."

"Probably you're right," I assented, impressed, as we turned a corner.

A young woman in a very attractive linen gown was strolling toward us,
quite prettily engaged with a book which she read as she walked, her
fair young head bowed beneath a sunshade which tinted her face
becomingly. She gave me a shy smile and a low-voiced greeting as we
passed. Only my knowledge of the young woman prevented me from being
blinded by her engaging appearance.

"That," said I, when we were out of earshot, "shows you what a furore a
good-looking young man can create in a town like this. Josie Lockwood
has put on her best bib-and-tucker to go walking in this afternoon, on
the off-chance of meeting you, Mr. Duncan."

"Flattery note," he commented. "Who's Josie Lockwood?"

"Daughter of Blinky Lockwood, the richest man in Radville."

"Ah!" he said cryptically.

We had come to Miss Carpenter's. I opened the gate for him, but he
stood aside, refusing to precede me. And courtesy in the young folk of
to-day warms my old heart.

He had as much for Hetty Carpenter. Within an hour he had insinuated
himself into her good graces with a deftness, an ease, that astounded.
Within three hours he was established, bag and baggage, in her very
best room.

And thirty minutes after she had helped Duncan unpack, Hetty had to run
downtown to buy a spool of thread.




VII


A WINDOW IN RADVILLE

A jealous secret, which has never heretofore been divulged, is
responsible for the prosperity of the Radville _Citizen_--at
least, in very great measure. As the discoverer of this recipe for
circulation, I have kept it carefully locked in my guilty bosom for
many a year, and if I now betray it I do so without scruple, for the
_Gazette_ is now established firmly in a groove of popularity from
which you'd find it hard to oust the paper. So here's letting the cat
out of the bag:

The policy of the _Citizen_ has long been to devote its columns
mainly to the exploitation of what is known in newspaper terminology as
"the local story." Of the news of the great outside world we're
parsimonious, recognising the fact that the coronation of King Edward
VII. is a matter of much less import to our community than the
holocaust which was responsible for the destruction of Sir
Higginbottom's new hen-house. Similarly a West Indian tornado involving
losses running up into hundreds of thousands of dollars sinks into
relative insignificance as compared with the local weather forecast and
its probable effect on crops not worth ten thousand; while the enforced
abdication of the Sultan of Turkey gets a "stick" (a space in a
newspaper column about as long as your forefinger, if you have a small
hand) as contrasted with the column and a half assigned to the death of
old Colonel Bohun.

Now, naturally, a paper in a small country town can't afford a large
and hustling staff of enthusiastic reporters; and very probably the
_Citizen_ would overlook many items and stories of burning local
interest were it not for the fact that the population has been
cunningly made to serve in a reportorial capacity without either pay or
its own knowledge. We literally get our local news by wireless; and
from dawn to dark there's a constant supply of it on tap.

It's this way: our editorial rooms are in the second storey of a
building overlooking Court House Square. The lower floor is occupied by
the Post Office, and in front of the Post Office are a hitching-post
and two long, weather-scarred benches, while just across the road--I
mean street--on the boundary of the square proper--is a near-bronze
drinking-fountain and watering-trough erected from the proceeds of
several fairs given by the local branch of the W. C. T. U. Naturally,
indeed inevitably, all Radville gravitates to the Post Office, bringing
the news with it, and stops to discuss it on the steps or the benches
or by the fountain; and the acoustics are admirable. With a window open
and scratch-pad handy, the keen-eared scribe at his desk in our offices
can hardly fail to pick up every scrap of town information between
sunrise and dusk.... Of course, in winter the supply's not so good.
Winter before last we all suffered with colds acquired through keeping
the windows open; and last winter our circulation fell off surprisingly
through keeping them closed. This winter we contemplate cutting a
trap-door through the floor for the ostensible purpose of ventilation.

And thus it was that I managed to hear much of Mr. Duncan while I
myself was engaged in formulating an estimate of the young man. He
engaged the popular imagination no less than mine own, although I was
more intimately associated with him--as a fellow-resident at Hetty
Carpenter's. My professional duties making their habitual demands upon
my time, I saw, it may be, less of him than many of our people.
Certainly I learned less of his ways from first-hand knowledge. But
from my desk (it's the nearest to the window right above the Post
Office door) I was enabled to keep a pretty close line upon his habits
and movements, during the first fortnight of his stay in Radville.

At home I saw him with unvarying regularity at meal-times and less
frequently after supper. Between whiles he seemed to observe a fairly
regular routine: in the morning, after breakfast, he walked abroad for
his health's sake; in the afternoon and evening he sequestered himself
in his room for the pursuit of his legal studies. About the genuineness
of these latter I was long without a question: having been privileged
to inspect his room I found it redolent of an atmosphere of highly
commendable application. His writing table was a model of neatness, and
his store of legal treatises impressed one vastly. That no one, not
even Hetty Carpenter, ever saw the room without remarking the open
volume of "The Law of Torts," with its numerous pages painstakingly
spaced by slips of paper by way of bookmarks, is an attested fact. That
it was always the same volume is less widely known.

Less directly (that is to say, via my window) I learned of him
compendiously from sources which would have been anonymous but for my
long acquaintance with the voices of the townspeople.... I write these
pages at my desk at home and, if truth's to be told, somewhat
surreptitiously; but with these voices ringing in my memory's ear I
seem still to be sitting at my erstwhile desk by the window, looking
out over Court House Square, chewing the rubber heel of my pencil the
while I listen. It's summer weather and there's a smell in the air of
dust and heat; the square simmers and shimmers in unclouded sunshine,
its many green plots of grass a trifle grey and haggard with dust, the
flagstaff with its two flanking cannon by the bandstand in the middle
wavering slightly in the haze of heat; there are two rigs, a farm-wagon
and a buckboard, hitched to the post below, and some boys are squirting
water on one another by holding their hands over the lips of the
fountain across the way. Immediately opposite, on the far side of the
square, the Court House rises proudly in all the majesty of its
columned front and clapboarded sides; farther along there's the
Methodist Church, very severe, with its rows of sheds to one side for
the teams of the more rural members. Behind them all bulk our hills,
dim and purple against the overwhelming blue of the sky. It's very
quiet: there are few sounds, and those few most familiar: the raucous
war-cry of a rooster somewhere on the outskirts of town; an
intermittent thudding of hoofs in the inch-deep dust of the roadway;
Miles Stetson wringing faint but genuine shrieks of agony from his
cornet, in a room behind the Opery House on the next street;
periodically a shuffle of feet on the sidewalk below; less frequently
the whine of the swinging doors at Schwartz's place; above it all,
perhaps, the shrill but not unpleasant accents of Angie Tuthill as she
pauses on the threshold downstairs and injects surprising information
into the nothing-reluctant ears of Mame Garrison.

" ... He's got six suits of clothes, three for summer and three for
winter, and two others to wear to parties--one regular full-dress suit
and another without any tails on the coat that he told Miss Carpenter
was a dinner-coat, but Roland Barnette says he must've meant a Tuxedo,
because nobody wears that kind of clothes except at night; so how could
it be a dinner-coat?... And Miss Carpenter told Ma he's got twelve
striped shirts and eight white ones and dozens of silk socks and two
dozen neckties and handkerchiefs till you can't count and...."

Mame punctuates this monologue with a regular and excusable "My land!"
and the young voices fade away into the mid-summer afternoon quiet. I
am free to resume my interrupted flight of fancy, but I refrain. The
atmosphere is soporiferous, hardly conducive to editorial inspiration,
and I find the commingled flavours of red-cedar, glue and rubber quite
nourishing.

Presently Dr. Mortimer, the minister, comes down the street in company
with his deacon, Blinky Lockwood. They are discussing someone in
subdued tones, but I catch references to a worthy young man and the
vacancy in the choir.

Josie Lockwood rustles into hearing with Bessie Gabriel in tow. Josie
is rattling volubly, but with a hint of the confidential in her tone.
She insists that: "Of course, I never let on, but every time we meet I
can just feel him looking and...."

Bessie interposes: "Why, Tracey Tanner's just crazy for fear he'll take
on with Angie."

I can see Josie's head toss at this. "I bet he don't know what Angie
Tuthill looks like. That's too absurd..."

"Absurd" is Josie's newest word. It's a very good word, too, but
sometimes I fear she will wear it threadbare. It closes her remarks as
the two girls dart into the Post Office, and there is peace for a time;
then they emerge giggling, and I hear Josie declare: "I'd get Roland
Barnette to do it, but he's so jealous. He makes me tired."

Bessie's response is inaudible.

"Well," Josie continues, "I'm simply not going to send them out until I
meet him. Father said I could give it a week from Saturday, but I won't
unless--"

Bessie interrupts, again inaudibly.

"Of course I could do that, but ... if I just said 'Miss Carpenter and
guests' that nosey old Homer Littlejohn'd think I meant him too, and if
I only said 'guest' it'd look too pointed. Don't you think so?"

To my relief they pass from hearing, and I feel for my pipe for
comfort. Anyway, I never did like Josie Lockwood.... Smoking, I
meditate on the astonishing power of personality. Here is Mr. Nathaniel
Duncan no more than a fortnight in our midst (the phrase is used
callously, as something sacred to country journalism) and, behold! not
yet has the town ceased to discuss him. The control he has over the
local mind and imagination is certainly wonderful: the more so since he
has apparently made no effort to attract attention; rather, I should
say, to the contrary. Quiet and unassuming he goes his way, minding his
own business as carefully as we would mind it for him, with all the
good will in the world, if only we could find out what it is. But we
can't leave him alone....

Tracey Tanner interrupts my musings.

"Hello!" he twangs, like a tuneless banjo.

"'Lo, Tracey." This lofty and blase greeting can come from none other
than Roland Barnette.

"Where you goin'?"

"Over to the railway station."

"What for?"

"To give you something to talk about. I'm going to send a telegram to a
friend of mine in Noo York."

"Aw, you ain't the only one can send telegrams. Sam Graham sent one
just now."

"_He_ did!"

"Uh-huh. I was sort of hangin' round, when he came in, and I seen him
send it myself."

"Sam Graham telegraphing! Do you know; who to, Tracey?" Roland's
superiority is wearing thin under contact with his curiosity. This
surprising bit of news makes him distinctly more affable and inclined
to lower himself to the social level of the son of the livery-stable
keeper.

As for myself, I am inclined to lean out of the window and call Tracey
up, lest he get out of hearing before I hear the rest of it.
Fortunately I am not thus obliged to compromise my dignity. The two are
at pause.

"Gimme a cigarette 'nd I'll tell you," bargains Tracey shrewdly. "Lew
Parker told me after Sam'd gone."

The deal is put through promptly.

"He was telegraphin' to--Got a match?"

For once I am in sympathy with Roland, whose tone betrays his desire to
wring Tracey's exasperating neck.

"Aw, he was only telegraphing to Gresham an' Jones for some sody water
syrups."

"Where'd he get the money?" There's fine scorn in Roland's comment.

"I dunno, but he handed Lew a five-dollar bill to pay for the message."

"Well, if Sam Graham's got any money he'd better hold on to it, instead
of buying sody-water syrups. I guess Blinky Lockwood'll get after him
when he finds it out. He owes Blinky a note at the bank and it's coming
due in a day or two and Blinky ain't going to renew, neither."

"Sam seemed cheerful 'nough. Anyhow, it ain't my funeral."

I have now something to think about, indeed, and am more than half
inclined to stroll up to Graham's and find out what has happened, on my
own account, when the voices of Hi Nutt and Watty the tailor drift up
to me. The cronies are coming down for their regular afternoon session
on the Post Office benches--a function which takes place daily, just as
soon as the sun gets round behind the building, so that the seats are
shaded. And I pause, true to the ethics of journalism; it's my duty not
to leave just yet.

Surprisingly enough these two likewise are discussing Sam Graham. At
least I can deduce nothing else from Hiram's first words, though their
subject is for the moment nameless.

"Yes, sir; he's the poorest man in this town."

"Yes," Watty quavers; "yes, I guess he be."

"An' he's got no more business sense _into_ him than God give a
goose."

"No, I guess he ain't."

"Why, look at the way things has run down at his store since Margaret
died. She kept things a-runnin' while she was alive."
 "Yes, she was a fine woman, Margaret Bohun
was."

"An' they ain't no doubt about it, Sam had money into the bank when she
died. But ever sinst then it's been all go out and no come in with him.
He keeps fussin' and fussin' with them inventions of his, but no one
ever heard tell of his gettin' anything out of 'em."

"And what'd he do with all the money he had when Margaret died?"

"Spent it, what he didn't lend and give away and lose endorsin' notes
for his friends and then havin' to pay 'em. An' speakin' of notes, I
heard Roland Barnette say, t'other day, that old Sam had a note comin'
due to the bank, an' Blinky wasn't goin' to renew it any more."

"'Course Sam can't pay it."

"Certainly he can't. I was in his store day before yestiddy an' they
wasn't nobody come in for nothin' while I was there. He don't do no
business to speak of."

"How long was you there, Hi?"

"From nine o'clock to noon."

"What doin'?"

"Nuthin'; jes' settin' round."

"I seen him to-day goin' into the bank. Guess he must've gone to see
Lockwood 'bout thet note."

"Well, I don't envy him his call on Blinky Lockwood none."

"Mebbe he went in to deposit his coupons," Watty chuckled.

Hiram snorted and there was silence while he filled and lit his pipe.

"I hearn tell this mornin'," he resumed, "that Josie Lockwood's goin'
to give a party next week."

"Yes, I hearn it too. Angie Tuthill was talkin' 'bout it to Mame
Garrison up to Leonard and Call's. She said they was goin' to have the
biggest time this town ever see. Goin' to decyrate the grounds with
lanterns an' have ice cream sent from Phillydelphy, and cakes, too.
Can't make out what's come into Blinky to let that gal of his waste
money like that."

"I figger," says Hiram after a sapient pause, "she must be gettin' it
up for thet New York dood."

"Duncan?"

"Uh-huh."

"I didn't know he was 'quainted with the Lockwoods."

"I didn't know he was 'quainted with nobody."

"Nobody 'ceptin' Homer Littlejohn an' Hetty Carpenter, an' they don't
seem to know much about him. I call him darn cur'us. Hetty says he
allus a-settin' in his room, a-studyin' an' a-studyin' an' a-studyin'."

"He goes walkin' mornin's, Hetty told me."

"Wal, he don't come downtown much. Nobody hardly ever sees him 'cept to
church."

Hiram ponders this profoundly, finally delivering himself of an opinion
which he has never forsaken. "I claim he's a s'picious character."

"Don't look to me as though he knew 'nough to be much of anythin'."

"Wal, now, if he's a real student an' they ain't no outs 'bout him,
what in tarnation's he doin' here? Thet's jest what I'd like to have
somebody tell me, Watty."

"Hetty sez he sez he wants a quiet place to study."

Hiram snorts with scorn. "Oh, fid-del! You don't catch no Noo York
young feller a-settlin' down in Radville unless he's crazy or somethin'
worse."

"'Tain't no use tellin' Hetty Carpenter thet." "No; if anybody sez a
word agin him she shets 'em right up."

"'Tain't only Hetty, but all the wimmin's on his side."

"Thet's proof enough to me he ain't right." "Wimmin," says Watty, as
the result of a period of philosophical consideration, "is all crazy
about clothes. When a feller's got good clothes you can't make them see
no harm into him, no matter what he is. I pressed some of Duncan's last
Satiddy. I never see clothes--such goods and linin's. They was made for
him, too--made by a tailor on Fifth Avenue, Noo York. I fergit the name
now."

"Wal, Roland Barnette sez they ain't stylish. He sez they're too much
like an undertaker's gitup."

"Wal, Roland oughter know. He's the fanciest dressed-up feller in the
county."

"Yes, I guess he be."

The subject apparently languishes, but I know that it still occupies
their sage meditations; and presently this is demonstrated by Hiram,
who expectorates liberally by way of preface.

"When this cuss Duncan fust come here," he says with a self-contained
chuckle, "ev'rybody but me figgered he had stacks of money. Guess they
be singin' a different tune, now, sinst he's been goin' round askin'
for work."

This is news to me, and I sit up, sharing Watty's astonishment.

"Be he a-doin' thet, Hiram?"

"That's what he's been a-doin'."

"Funny I missed hearin' about it."

"He only started this mornin'. He went to Sothern and Lee's and Leonard
and Call's and Godfrey's--'nd then I guess he must 'ev quit
discouraged. They wouldn't none of them give him nothin'. Leastways,
thet's what they said after he'd gone out. He didn't give anybody a
reel chance to say anythin'. I was in Leonard and Call's and he came in
an' asked for a job, but the minute Len looked at him he turned right
round and slunk out without a-waitin' for Len to say a word." Hiram
smoked in huge enjoyment of the retrospect. "He's the curiousest
critter we ever had in this town."

"Yes," agrees Watty, "I guess he be."

At this juncture comes an interruption; Tracey Tanner returns,
hot-foot. Either he has been running, or his breathlessness is due to
excitement. Before the two upon the bench he pauses in agitated glee, a
bearer of tremendous tidings.

"Hello," he pants.

"Now, you Tracey Tanner," Hiram cuts in sharply, "you run 'long an'
don't be a-botherin' round. Seems like a body never can git a chance to
rest, with you children allus a-buttin' in--"

"Aw, shet up," says Tracey dispassionately. "I only wanted to tell you
the news."

Watty quavers: "What news, Tracey?"

"Well," says the boy, "I'll tell you, Watty, but I wouldn't 've told
him after what he said."

"But what's the news, Tracey?" There is suspense in the iteration.

"Well, seein's it's you, Watty--"

"You Tracey Tanner, you run 'long and stop your jokin'!" interrupts
Hiram with authority.

"'Tain't no joke; it's news, I'm tellin' you. Sa-ay, what d'ye think,
Watty?"

"Yes, Tracey, yes? What is it, boy?"

"Thet--Noo--York--dood," drawls Tracey, "is a-workin' for Sam Graham!"

A dramatic pause ensues. I rise and find my coat.

"Tracey Tanner," shrills Hiram, "be you a-tellin' the truth?"

"Kiss my hand and cross my heart and vow Honest Injun, I seen him up
there just now in the store, Watty, tendin' the sody fountain."

"Wal," says Hiram, rising, "I don't believe a word of it, but if it's
true we better be goin' round to see, Watty, 'cause it ain't a-goin' to
last long. He won't stay after he finds out Sam ain't got no money to
pay his wages with."




VIII


THE MAN OF BUSINESS IN EMBRYO

There's no questioning the fact that two weeks of Radville had driven
Duncan to desperation; on the morning of the fifteenth day he wakened
in his room at Miss Carpenter's and lay for a time abed staring
vacantly at the gaudily papered ceiling, not through laziness remaining
on his back, but through sheer inertia. The prospect of rising to
ramble through another purposeless, empty day appalled his imagination;
it had been all very well when the humour of his project intrigued him,
when the village was a novelty and its inhabitants "types" to be
studied, watched, analysed and classified with secret amusement; but
now he felt that he had already exhausted its possibilities; he was a
foreigner in thought and instinct, had as little in common with
Radvillians as any newly imported Englishman would have had. In plain
language, he was bored to the point of extinction.

"Why," he reflected aloud, "it doesn't seem reasonable, but I'm
actually looking forward to the delirious dissipation of church next
Sunday!

"Me?...

"If Kellogg could only see me now!"

He laughed mirthlessly.

"I must have done something to deserve this in my misspent life...

"Wonder if nothing ever happens here?.... I'd give a whole lot, if I
had it, for a good rousing fire on Main Street--the Bigelow House, for
choice....

"And it's got me to the point of drooling to myself, like those fellows
you read about who get lost in the desert....

"Come! Get out of this! And, my boy, remember to 'count that day lost
whose low descending sun sees nothing accomplished, nothing done.'...

"Probably misquoted, at that."

Sullenly he rose and dressed.

He was late at the breakfast and silent and reserved throughout that
meal. Poor Miss Carpenter thought him dissatisfied and hung round his
chair, purring with a solicitude that almost maddened him. As soon as
possible he made his escape from the house.

The walk he indulged in that morning took him in a wide circle: south
on the road to the Gap, then eastwards, crossing the railroad and the
river, north through a smiling agricultural region, east to the Flats,
and so across the stone bridge to the Old Town once more. He was
trudging up Street toward Centre shortly after eleven--hot, a little
tired, and utterly disgusted. The exercise, instead of exhilarating,
had depressed him; the quickened flow of blood through his veins, the
vigour of the clean air he inhaled, demanded of him action of some
sort; and he had nothing whatever to do with himself all afternoon save
drowse over "The Law of Torts."

Recognition of Leonard and Call's familiar shop-front fired him with a
spirit of adventure and enterprise. He stopped short, thoughtfully
rubbing his small moustache the wrong way, his vision glued to the
embarrassingly candid window displays.

"It'd be an awful thing for me to do....

"Think of yourself, man, jumping counters in and out amongst all
hose--those _Things!_ like a lunatic monkey performing on a Monday
morning's clothes line!..."

He thought deeply, and sighed. "It ain't moral....

"But it's one of the rules, it must be did. Henry said a ribbon clerk
was a social equal....

"Come, now! No more shennanigan! Brace up! Be a man!...

"A man? That's the whole trouble: I am a man; I've got no business in a
place like that."

He turned and moved away slowly. But the idea had him by the heels. He
struggled against a growing resolution to return. Then enlightenment
came to him suddenly. He paused again, grappling with this amazing
revelation of self.

"Great Scott! Harry was right, damn him! He said this place would
reconstruct me from the inside out and vice versa, and by jinks! it
has. I actually _want_ to work!...

"Can you beat that--_me_!"

He swung back to Leonard and Call's, mentally reviewing his
instructions.

"Let's see. I was to wait at least a month, to let the shopkeepers get
accustomed to the sight of me.... _Hmm_.... Harry certainly has a
cute way of expressing his thought.... But it can't be helped; I can't
wait. If I do, I'll throw up the job....

"I'm to walk in and say, politely: '_I'm looking for employment. If
at any time you should have an opening here that you can offer me, I
shall endeavour to give satisfaction. Good-day_.'...

"But be careful not to press it. Just say it and get right out...."

With the air of a man who knows his own mind he pulled open the wire
screen-door and strode in.

Two minutes later he emerged, breathing hard, but with the glitter of
determination in his eye.

"I wouldn't 've believed I could get away with it. Here goes for the
next promising opening."

He headed for Sothern and Lee's drug-store.

"Wonder what that fellow would have said if I'd had the nerve to wait
and listen...."

In the drug-store he experienced less difficulty in making his speech
and exit; he flattered himself that he accomplished both gracefully,
even impressively. And indeed you may believe he left a gaping audience
behind him. So likewise at Godfrey's notions and stationery shop.

As he emerged from the latter the resonant clamour of the Methodist
Church clock drove him home for dinner, hungry and glowing with
self-approbation. At all events, no one had refused him: he had not
been set upon and incontinently kicked out. He felt that he was getting
on.

"Now this afternoon," he mused, "I'll wind up the job. By night
everyone in town will know I want work."

But if he had thought a moment he would have realised that he might
have spared himself the trouble; the consummation he so earnestly
desired was already being brought about by resident and recognised, if
unofficial, agents for the dissemination of news.

It was two o'clock or thereabouts, I gather, when, shaping his course
toward Radville's commercial centre, Duncan hesitated on the corner of
Beech Street, cocking an incredulous eye up at the weather-worn sign
which has for years adorned the side of Tuthill's grocery: a hand
indicating fixedly:

THIS WAY TO GRAHAM'S DRUG STORE

"Two druggists in Radville!" he mused. "Is it possible?... Then it's
Harry's mistake if the scheme fails; he said this was a one-horse
country town, but I'm blest if it isn't a thriving metropolis! Two!...
Here, I'm going to have a look."

He turned up Beech and presently discovered the object of his quest, a
two-storey building of "frame," guiltless of the ardent caress of a
paint-brush since time out of mind. On the ground floor the windows
were made up of many small square panes, several of which had been
rudely mended. Through them the interior glimmered darkly. In the
foreground stood a broken bottle, shaped like a mortuary urn and half
full of pink liquid. Beside it reposed a broken packing-box in which
bleary camphor-balls nestled between torn sheets of faded blue paper.
Of these a silent companion in misery stood on the far side of the
window: a towering pagoda-like cage of wire in which (trapped,
doubtless, by means of some mysterious bait known only to alchemists)
three worn but brutal-looking sponges were apparently slumbering in
exhaustion. Back of these a dusty plaster cast of a male figure lightly
draped seemed to represent the survival of the fittest over some
strange and deadly patent medicine. The recessed door bore an
inscription in gold letters, tarnished and half obliterated:

AM GRAHAM
 RUGS & CHEM C LS

 R SCRIPTION CAREF LY C POUNDED

"Looks like the very place for one of my acknowledged abilities," said
Duncan. He turned the knob and entered, advancing to the middle of the
dingy room. There, standing beside a cold and rusty stove whose pipe
wandered giddily to a hole in the farthest wall (reminding him of some
uncouth cat with its tail over its back), he surveyed with the single
requisite comprehensive glance the tiers of shelves tenanted by a
beggarly array of dingy bottles; the soda fountain with its company of
glasses and syrup jars; the flanking counters with their broken
show-cases housing a heterogenous conglomeration of unsalable wares;
the aged and tattered posters heralding the virtues of potent affronts
to the human interior--to say naught of its intelligence; the drab
walls and debris-littered flooring.

A slight grating noise behind him brought Duncan round with a start. At
a work-bench near the window sat a white-haired man garbed baggily in
an old crash coat and trousers. His head was bowed over something
clamped in a vise, at which he was tinkering busily with a file. He did
not look up, but, as his caller moved, inquired amiably: "Well?"

"Good-morning," stammered Duncan; "er--I should say afternoon."

"So you should," Sam admitted, still fussing with his work. "Anything
you want?"

Duncan swallowed hard and mastered his confusion. "Would it be possible
for me to speak to the proprietor a moment?"

"I should jedge it would. Go right along." Sam filed vigorously.

"Might I ask--are you Mr. Graham?"

"Yes, sir; that's me."

The filing continued stridently. Duncan moved closer. There was scant
encouragement to be gathered from Graham's indifferent attitude; yet
his voice had been pleasant, kindly.

"I--I'm looking for employment," said Duncan hastily. "If--"

"Employment!"

Graham dropped his tools with a clatter and faced round. For a moment
his eyes twinkled and a wintry smile lightened his fine old features.
"Well, I declare!" he said, rising. "You must be the stranger the whole
town's been talkin' about."

"If at any time," Duncan pursued hastily, "you should have an opening
here that you can offer me, I shall endeavour to give satisfaction.
Good-day, sir." And he made for the door.

"Eh, just a minute," said Graham. "Are you in a hurry?"

Duncan paused, smiling nervously. "Oh, no--only I mustn't press it, you
know--just say it and get right--I mean I don't want to take up your
valuable time, sir."

Graham chuckled. "Guess the folks haven't been talking much to you
about me," he suggested. "You seem to have a higher opinion of the
value of my time than anybody else in Radville."

"Yes, but--that is to say--"

"But if you're really looking for a job, I'd like to give you one first
rate."

Duncan started toward him in breathless haste. "You--you'd like
to!--You don't mean it!"

"Yes," Graham nodded, smiling with enjoyment of his little joke. It was
harmless; he didn't for a moment believe that Duncan really needed
employment; and on the other hand it tickled him immensely to think
that anyone should apply to him for work.

"Well," said Duncan, staring, "you're the first man I ever met that
felt that way about it."

Sam's amusement dwindled. "The trouble is," he confessed--"the trouble
is, my boy, my business is so small I don't need any help. There isn't
much of anything to do here."

"That's just the sort of a place I'd like," said Duncan impulsively.
Then he laughed a little, uneasily. "I mean, I'm willing to take any
position, no matter how insignificant. I mean it, honestly."

"This might suit you, then--"

"I wish you'd let me try it, sir."

"But you don't understand." Graham was serious enough now; there wasn't
any joke in what he had to say. "To tell you the truth, I can't afford
it. When your pay was due, I'm afraid I shouldn't have any money to
give you."

Duncan dismissed this paltry consideration with a princely gesture. "I
don't mind that part," he insisted. "Mr. Graham, if you'll teach me the
drug business I'll work for you for nothing."

He said it earnestly, for he meant it just a bit more seriously than he
himself realised at the moment; and I'm glad to think it was because
Sam's serene and gentle, guileless nature had appealed to the young
man. He had that in him, that instinct for decency and the right, that
made him like this simple, sweet and almost childish old man at
sight--like him and want to help him, though he was hardly conscious of
this and believed his motive rather more than less selfish, that he was
grasping at this opportunity for relief from the deadly ennui that
oppressed him as madly as a famished man at a crust. Indeed, the boy
was eager to deceive himself in this respect, with youth's wholesome
horror of sentiment.

"Between you and me," he hurried on, "it's this way: I've been here for
two weeks with nothing to do but look at a book, and it's got me crazy
enough to want to work!"

But still I like to think it was for a better reason, that his conduct
then bore out my theory that there are streaks of human kindliness and
right-thinking in all of us--buried deep though they may be by many an
acquired stratum of callousness and egoism: the sediment of life caking
upon the soul....

But as for Sam, as soon as he recovered he shook his head in thoughtful
deprecation. "Well, I swan!" he said. "I guess you must find it pretty
slow down here. But"--brightening--"if you feel that way about it, I'd
better take you over to Sothern and Lee's. They'd be glad to get you at
the price."

"And in a week they'd think they were over-paying me," Duncan argued.
"No--I've been there. Why not try me on here?"

"Well, I'm just a little bit afraid you wouldn't learn much, my boy. I
don't do business enough to give you a good idea of it. Sothern and Lee
get all the trade nowadays."

"But look here, sir: don't you think if I came in here perhaps we could
build up the business?"

"No, I'm afraid not," Graham deprecated, pursing his lips and rubbing
the white stubble of his beard with a toil-worn thumb.

Duncan eyed him in bitter humour. "No, of course not. You're right--but
somebody must have tipped you off."

Graham paid little heed, whose mind was bent upon his own parlous
circumstances. "I haven't got capital enough to stock up the store," he
explained; "that's the real trouble. Folks have got into the habit of
going to the other store because I'm out of so many things."

"Well, to be sure," said Duncan, a little dashed; "you can't expect to
do business unless you've got things to sell...."

"I don't expect it, my boy," Sam assented dolefully. "'Twouldn't be in
reason.... You see," he added, hope lightening his gloom, "I'm working
on an invention of mine, and if that should work out I'd get some money
and be able to get a fresh stock. Then I'd be glad to have you."

Duncan brushed this impatiently aside. "How much business are you doing
here now?"

"Some days"--Graham reckoned it on his fingers--"I take in a dollar or
two, and some days... nothing.... There's my sody fountain," he said
with a jerk of a thumb toward it: "got that fixed up a little while
ago, and it's bringing in a little. Not much. You see, I need more
syrups. I've only got vanilly now."

"Soda water!" Duncan jumped at the idea. "Hold on! All the girls round
here drink soda, don't they?"

"Oh, yes," said Graham abstractedly.

The thought infused new life into the younger man's waning purpose.
"Mr. Graham, I wish you'd let me come in here for a while. I don't care
about wages."

Graham lifted his shoulders resignedly. "Well, my boy, it don't seem
right, but if you really want to work here for nothing, I'll be glad to
have you; and if things look up with me, I'll be glad to pay you."

Abruptly he found his hand grasped and pumped gratefully.

"That's mighty good of you, Mr. Graham. When can I start?"

"Why... whenever you like."

In a twinkling Duncan's hat and gloves were off. "I'd like to, now," he
said. "Where can we get more syrups?"

"Unfortunately... I'll have to buy them."

"How much?" Duncan's hand was in his pocket in an instant.

"Oh, no, you mustn't do that." Sam backed away in alarm. "I couldn't
allow it, my boy. It's good of you, but..."

"Either," Nat told himself, "I'm asleep or someone's refusing to take
money from me." He grinned cheerfully. "Oh, that's all right," he
contended aloud. "I'll draw it down as soon as we begin to sell soda."
He selected a bill from his slender store. "Will five dollars be
enough?"

"Oh, yes, but it wouldn't be right for me to--"

But by this time Duncan was pressing the bill into his hand.
"Nonsense!" he insisted. "How can we build up trade without syrup?"

"But--but--"

"And how can I learn the business without trade?" He closed Graham's
unwilling fingers over the money and skipped away.

Sighing, Graham gave over the unequal argument. "Well, if you're
satisfied, my boy.... But I'll have to write to Elmiry for it."

"Telegraph."

"Telegraph!" Graham laughed. "That'd kill Lew Parker, I guess."

"Who's he?"

"Telegraph operator and ticket agent."

"Well, he won't be missed much. Telegraph and tell 'em to send the
goods C.O.D. Please, Mr. Graham. We want to get things moving here, you
know; we've got to build up the business. We'll put out some signs and
... and ... well, we'll get the people in the habit of coming here
somehow. You'll see!"

He raked the poverty-stricken shelves with a calculating eye, all his
energy fired by enthusiasm at the prospect of doing something. Graham
watched him with kindling liking and admiration. His old lips quivered
a little before he voiced his thought.

"You--you know, my boy, you've got splendid business ability," he
asserted with whole-souled conviction.

Duncan almost reeled. "What?" he cried.

"I was just saying, you have wonderful business ability."

"You're the first man that ever said that. I wonder if it's so."

"I'm sure of it."

"Well," said Nat, chuckling, "I'll write that to my chum. He'll--"

"Oh, I can tell," Graham interrupted. "Now, I ... Well, you see, I've
been a failure in business. So far as that goes, I've been a failure in
everything all my life."

Duncan stared for a moment, then offered his hand. "For luck," he
explained, meeting Graham's puzzled gaze as his hand was taken.

Wondering, Graham shook his head; and gratitude made his old voice
tremulous. He put a hand over Duncan's, patting it gently.

"I want you to know, my boy, that I appreciate..." His voice broke.
"It's mighty kind of you to buy the syrup--very kind--"

"Nothing of the sort; it's just because I've got great business
ability." Duncan laughed quietly and moved away. "We'll want to clean
up a bit," said he; "got a broom? I'll raise the dust a bit while
you're out sending that wire."

"You'll find one in the cellar, I guess, but--your clothes--"

"Oh, that's all right. Where's the cellar?"

"Underneath," Graham told him simply, taking down a battered hat from a
hook behind the counter.

"I know; but how do I get there?"

"By the steps; you go through that door there into the hall. The steps
are under the stairs to our rooms. I live above the store, you see."

"Yes.... Good-bye, Mr. Graham."

"Good-bye, my boy."

Duncan watched the old man move slowly out of sight, then with a groan
sat down on the counter to think it over. "It wouldn't be me if I
didn't make a mess of things somehow," he told himself bitterly. "Now
you have gone and went and done it, Mr. Fortune Hunter. You stand a
swell chance of getting away with the goods when you take a wageless
job in a spavined country drug-store with no trade worth mentioning and
nothing to draw it with... just because that old duffer's the only
human being you've spotted in this burg!...

"Wonder what Harry would say if he heard about that wonderful business
ability thing...

"But what in thunder can we do to bring business to this bum joint?"

He raked his surroundings with a discouraged glance.

"Oh," he said thoughtfully, "hell!"

Five minutes later Ben Sperry found him in the same position, his head
bent in perplexed reverie. Sperry had been travelling for Gresham and
Jones, a wholesale drug-house in Elmira, more years than I can
remember. His friendship for Sam Graham, contracted during the days
when Graham's was the drug-store of Radville, has survived the decay of
the business. He's a square, decent man, Sperry, and has wasted many an
hour trying to persuade Sam to pay a little more attention to the
business. I suspect he suffered the shock of his placid life when he
found Sam absent and the shop in the care of this spruce, well set-up
young man.

"Anything I can do for you?" chirped Duncan cheerfully, dropping off
the counter as Sperry entered.

"No-o; I just wanted to see old Sam. Is he upstairs?"

"No, Mr. Graham's not in at present," Duncan told him civilly.

Sperry wrinkled his brows over this problem. "You working here?" he
asked.

"Yes, sir."

"Well, I'll be hanged!"

"Let us hope not," said Duncan pleasantly. He waited a moment, a little
irritated. "Sure there's nothing _I_ can do for you?"

"No-o," said Sperry slowly, struggling to comprehend. "Thank you just
the same."

"Not at all." Duncan turned away.

"You see," Sperry pursued, "I don't buy from drug-stores: I sell to
'em."

Duncan faced about with new interest in the man. "Yes?" he said
encouragingly.

"My card," volunteered Sperry, fishing the slip of pasteboard from his
waistcoat pocket. He dropped his sample case beside the stove and
plumped down in the chair, to the peril of its existence. "I don't make
this town very often," he pursued, while Duncan studied his card.
"Sothern and Lee are the only people I sell to here, but I never miss a
chance to chin a while with old Sam. So, having half an hour before
train time, I thought I'd drop in."

"Mr. Graham doesn't order from your house, then?"

"Doesn't order from anybody, does he?"

"I don't know; I've just come here. He'll be sorry to have missed you,
though. He's just stepped out to wire your house--I gather from the
fact that it's in Elmira; he mentioned that town, not the firm
name--for some syrups."

"You don't mean it!" Sperry gasped. "What's struck him all of a sudden?
He ain't put in any new stock for ten years, I reckon."

"Well, you see," Duncan explained artfully, "I've persuaded him, in a
way, to try to make something out of the business here. We're going to
do what we can, of course, in a small way at first."

Sperry wagged a dubious head. "I dunno," he considered. "Sam's a nice
old duffer, but he ain't got no business sense and never had; you can
see for yourself how he's let everything run to seed here. Sothern and
Lee took all his trade years ago."

"Yes, I know; that's why he needs me," said Duncan brazenly. In his
soul he remarked "O Lord!" in a tone of awe; his colossal impudence
dazed even himself. "But don't you think he could get back some of the
trade if the store was stocked up?"

"No doubt about that at all," Sperry averred; "he'd get the biggest
part of it."

"You think so?"

"Sure of it. You see, everybody round here likes Sam, and Sothern and
Lee have always been outsiders. They'd swing to this shop in a minute,
just on account of that. Fact is, I wasted a lot of talk on our firm a
couple of years ago, trying to make our people give him some credit,
but they couldn't see it. He owed them a bill then that was so old it
had grown whiskers."

"And still owes it, I presume?"

"You bet he still owes it. Always will. It's so small that it ain't
worth while suing for----"

"Look here, Mr. Sperry, how much is this bill with the whiskers?"

"About fifty dollars, I think," said the travelling man, fumbling for
his wallet. "I'm supposed to ask for payment every time I strike town,
you know, so I always have it with me; but I haven't had the heart to
say a word to Sam for a good long time.... Here it is."

Duncan studied carefully the memorandum: "To Mdse, as per bill
rendered, $47.85." "I wonder..." he murmured.

"Eh?" said Sperry.

"I was wondering:... Suppose you were to tell your people that there's
a young fellow here who'd like to give this store a boom.... Say he
wants a little credit because--because Mr. Graham won't let him put in
any cash----"

"Not a bit of use," Sperry negatived. "I would, myself, but the
house--no."

"But suppose I pay this bill----"

"Pay it? You really mean that?"

"Certainly I mean it." Duncan produced the wad of bills which Kellogg
had furnished him the night before his departure from New York. Thus
far he had broken only one of the five-hundred-dollar gold
certificates, and of that one he had the greater part left; living is
anything but expensive in Radville.

"I'm beginning to understand that I was cut out for an actor," he told
himself as he thumbed the roll with a serious air and an assumed
indifference which permitted Sperry to estimate its size pretty
accurately.

"That's quite a stack of chips you're carrying," Sperry observed.

Duncan's hand airily wafted the remark into the limbo of the
negligible. "A trifle, a mere trifle," he said casually. "I don't
generally carry much cash about me. Haven't for five years," he added
irrepressibly. He extracted a fifty-dollar certificate from the sheaf,
and handed it over.

"I'll take a receipt, but you needn't mention this to Mr. Graham just
now."

"No, certainly not." Sperry scrawled his signature to the bill.

"And about that line of credit?----"

"Well, with this paid, I guess you could have what you needed, in
moderation. Of course----"

"My name is Duncan--Nathaniel Duncan." Sperry made a memorandum of it
on the back of an envelope. "Any former business connections?"

"None that I care to speak about," Duncan confessed glumly.

Sperry's face lengthened. "No references?"

It took thought, and after thought courage; but Duncan hit upon the
solution at length. "Do you know L. J. Bartlett & Company, the
brokers?"

"Do I know J. Pierpont Morgan?"

"Then that's all right. Tell your people to inquire of Harry Kellogg,
the junior partner. He knows all about me."

Noting the name, Sperry put away the envelope. "That's enough. If he
says you're all right, you can have anything you want." He consulted
his watch. "Hmm. Train to catch.... But let's see: what do you need
here?"

Duncan reviewed the empty shelves, his face glowing. "Pills," he said
with a laugh: "all kinds of pills and... everything for a regular,
sure-enough drug-store, Mr. Sperry: everything Sothern and Lee carries
and a lot of attractive things they don't.... Small lots, you know,
until I see what we can sell."

"I see. You leave it to me; I probably know what you need better than
you do. I'll make out a list this afternoon and mail it to-night with
instructions to ship it at the earliest possible moment."

"Splendid!" Duncan told him. "You do that, and don't worry about our
making good. I'm going to put all my time and energy into this
proposition and----"

"Then you'll make good all right," Sperry assured him. "All anybody's
got to do is look at you to see you're a good business man." He
returned Duncan's pressure and picked up his sample-case. "S'long,"
said he, and left briskly, leaving Duncan speechless.

As if to assure himself of his sanity he put a hand to his brow and
stroked it cautiously. "Heavens!" he said, and sought the support of
the counter. "That's twice to-day I've been told that in the same
place!"...

"It's funny," he said, half dazed, "I never could have pulled that off
for myself!"




IX


SMALL BEGINNINGS

Presently Duncan moved and came out of his abstraction. "I'd better get
that broom," he said slowly. "The place certainly needs some expert
manicuring before we get that new stock in.... By George, I really
begin to believe we've got a chance to do something, after all!...

"Or else I'm dreaming...."

He opened the back door and entered a narrow and dark hallway, almost
stumbling over the lowest step of a flight of stairs communicating with
the upper storey. From above he could hear a clatter of crockery,
sounds of footsteps, a woman singing softly.

"Graham's wife, I presume. Never struck me he might be married....
Well, I'll be quiet. If she catches me now, before we're introduced,
she'll take me for a burglar."

On tiptoes he found the descent to the cellar, where by the aid of a
match he discovered a floorbrush whose reasons for retirement from
active employment were most evident even to his inexpert eye. None the
less nothing better offered, and he took it back with him to the shop.

Graham's tinkering was never of a cleanly sort; the floor was thick
with a litter of rubbish--shavings, old nuts and bolts, bits of scrap
tin and metal, torn paper, charred ends of matches: an indescribable
mess. Duncan surveyed it ruefully, but with the will to do strong in
him, took off his coat, turned up his trousers, and fell to. The
disposition of the sweepings troubled him far less than the dust he
raised; obviously the only place to put it was behind the counters.

"Nobody'll see it there," he said in a glow of satisfaction, pausing
with the room half cleared. "I always wondered what they did with that
sort of truck--under the beds, I suppose. Funny Graham never thought of
this, himself--it's so blame' easy."

He resumed his labours, thrilled with the sensation of accomplishment.
"One thing at least that I can do," he mused; "never again shall I fear
starvation... so long as there's a broom handy." Absorbed he brushed
away, raising a prodigious amount of dust and utterly oblivious to the
fact that he was observed.

Two shadows moved slowly athwart the windows, to which his back was
turned, paused, moved on out of sight, returned. It was only during a
pause for breath that he became aware of the surveillance.

Straightening up, he looked, gasped and fled for the back of the store.
"Heavens!" he whispered, aghast to recognise Josie Lockwood and Angie
Tuthill, of whose ubiquitous shadows in his way he had been conscious
so frequently within the past several days. "I _thought_ I must
have made an impression.... Don't tell me they're coming in!"

Behind the counter he struggled furiously into his coat. "They are," he
said with a sinking heart; "and I'll bet a dollar my face is dirty!"

Notwithstanding these misgivings, it was a very self-possessed young
man, to all appearances, who moved sedately round the end of the
counter to greet these possible customers. His bow was a very passable
imitation of the real thing, he flattered himself; and there's no
manner of doubt but that it flattered the two prettiest and most
forward young women in Radville of that day.

"May I have the honour of waiting on you, ladies?" he inquired with all
the suavity of an accomplished salesman.

Josie and Angie sidled together, giggling and simpering, quite overcome
by his manner. A muffled "How de do?" from Angie and a half-strangled
echo of the salutation from the other were barely articulate. But
hearing them he bowed again, separately to each.

"Good-afternoon," said he, and waited in an inquiring pose.

"This--'this is Mr. Duncan, isn't it?" inquired Josie, controlling
herself.

"Yes, and you are Miss Lockwood, if I'm not mistaken?"

Renewed giggles prefaced her: "Oh, how _did_ you know?"

"Could anyone remain two weeks in Radville and not hear of Miss
Lockwood?"

The shot told famously. "How nice of you! Mr. Duncan, I want you to
meet my friend, Miss Tuthill."

"I've had the honour of admiring Miss Tuthill from a distance," Duncan
assured the younger woman. And, "She'll burn up!" he feared secretly,
watching the conflagration of blushes that she displayed. "Just think
of getting away with a line of mush like that! Harry was right after
all: this is a country town, all right."

"And--and are you working here, Mr. Duncan?" Josie pursued.

"I'm supposed to be; I'm afraid I don't know the business very well, as
yet."

"Oh, that's awf'ly nice," Angle thought.

He thanked her humbly.

"We didn't expect to see you here," Josie assured him. "We just thought
we'd like some soda."

"Soda!" he parroted, horrified. He cast a glance askance at the tawdry
fountain. "Let's see: how d'you work the infernal thing?" he asked
himself, utterly bewildered.

"Yes," Angie chimed in; "it's so warm this afternoon, we----"

"I've got to put it through somehow," he thought savagely. And aloud,
"Yes, certainly," he said, and smiled winningly. "Will you be pleased
to step this way?"

Out of the corners of his eyes he detected the amused look that passed
between the girls. "Oh, very well!" he said beneath his breath. "You
may laugh, but you asked for soda, and soda you shall have, my dears,
if you die of it." He put himself behind the counter with an air of
great determination, and leaned upon it with both hands outspread until
he realised that this was the pose of a groceryman. "What'll you have?"
he demanded genially. "Er--that is--I mean, would you prefer vanilla
or--ah--soda?"

A chant antiphonal answered him:

"I hate vanilla."

"And so do I."

"Oh, don't say that!" he pleaded. "Of course you know there's--ah--
vanilla and vanilla..., Ah... some vanilla I know is detestable, but
when you get a really fine vintage--ah--imported vanilla, it's quite
another matter--ah--particularly at his season of the year----"

His confusion was becoming painful.

"Oh, is it?" asked Josie helpfully. Her eyes dwelt upon his with a
confiding expression which he later characterised as a baby stare; and
he was promptly reduced to babbling idiocy.

"Indeed it is; no doubt whatever, Miss Lockwood. Especially just now,
you know--ah--after the bock season--ah--I mean, when the weather is--
is--in a way--you might put it--vanilla weather."

"But I like chocolate best," Angle pouted. And he hated her consumedly
for the moment.

"Very well," Josie told him sweetly, "I'll have the vanilla."

He thanked her with unnecessary effusion and turned to inspect the
glassware. There could be no mistake about the right jar, however;
there was nothing but vanilla, and seizing it he removed the metal cap
and placed it before the girls. With less ease he discovered a whiskey
glass and put it beside the bottle, with a cordial wave of the hand.
 A pause ensued. Duncan was smiling fatuously, serene in the belief that
he had solved the problem: the way to serve soda was to make them help
themselves. It was very simple. Only they didn't... With a start he
became sensible that they were eyeing him strangely.

"You--ah--wanted vanilla, did you not?"

"Yes, thanks, vanilla," Josie agreed.

"Well, that's it," he said firmly, indicating the jar and the glass.

Josie giggled. "But I don't want to drink it clear. You put the syrup
in the glass, you know, and then the soda."

"Oh, I see! You want to make a high-ba--ah--a long drink of it. Ah,
yes!" He procured a glass of the regulation size. "Now I understand." A
pause. "If you'll be good enough to help yourself to the syrup."

"No; you do it," Josie pleaded.

"Certainly." He lifted the whiskey-glass and the jar and began to pour.
"If you'll just say when."

"What? Oh, that's enough, thank you."

"If I ever get out of this fix, I'll blow the whole shooting match," he
promised himself, holding the glass beneath the faucet and fiddling
nervously with the valves. For a moment he fancied the tank must be
empty, for nothing came of his efforts. Then abruptly the fixture
seemed to explode. "A geyser!" he cried, blinded with the dash of
carbonated water and syrup in his face, while he fumbled furiously with
the valves.

As unexpectedly as it had begun the flow ceased. He put down the glass,
found his handkerchief and mopped his dripping face. When able to see
again he discovered the young women leaning against one of the
show-cases, weak with laughter but at a safe remove.

"Our soda's so strong, you know," he apologised. "But if you'll stay
where you are, I'll try again."

Warned by experience, he worked at the machine gingerly, finally
producing a thin, spluttering trickle. Beaming with triumph, he looked
up. "I think it's safe now," he suggested; "I seem to have it under
control."

Angie and Josie returned, torn by distrust but unable to resist the
fascination of the stranger in our village. And there's no denying the
boy was good-looking and a gentleman by birth: a being alien to their
experience of men.

He had filled one glass and was tincturing it with syrup when he caught
again that confiding smile of Josie's, full upon him as the beams of a
noon-day sun.

"Haven't we seen you at church, Mr. Duncan?" she said prettily.

"I think, perhaps, you may have," he conceded. "I have seen you, both."
The second glass (for he was determined that Angie should not escape)
took up all his attention for an instant. "Do you have to go, too?" he
inquired out of this deep preoccupation.

"What?"

"I mean, do you attend regularly?" he amended hastily.

"Oh, yes, of course," Josie simpered, accepting the glass he offered
her. "You make it a rule to go every Sunday, don't you, Mr. Duncan?"

He permitted himself an indiscretion, secure in the belief it would
pass unchallenged: "It's one of the rules, but I didn't make it."

"Did you know there was a vacancy in the choir?" Angle asked, taking up
her glass.

"Choir?"

"Yes," Josie chimed in; "we were hoping you'd join. I want you to,
awfully."

"We're both in the choir," Angie explained.

"And all the girls want you to join. Don't they, Angie?"

"Oh, yes, indeed; they're all just dying to meet you."

"I'll have to write and ask," he said abstractedly.

"Why, what do you mean by that?"

Josie's question struck him dumb with consternation. He made curious
noises in his throat, and fancied (as was quite possible) that they
eyed him in a peculiar fashion. "It's--I mean--a little trouble with my
throat," he managed to lie, at length. "I must ask my physician if I
may, first."

"Oh, I see," said Josie.

"But," he hastened to change the subject, "you're not drinking, either
of you. I sincerely hope it's not so very bad."

Angie replaced her glass, barely tasted. "Do you like it, Josie?"

To Josie's credit it must be admitted that she made a brave attempt to
drink. But the mixture was undoubtedly flat, stale and unprofitable.
She sighed, put it back on the counter, and rose to the emergency.

"Mine's perfectly lovely"--with a ravishing smile--"but it's not very
sweet."

"I made them dry for you--thought you'd like 'em that way," he
stammered. "Perhaps you'd like 'em better if I put a collar on 'em?"

The chorus negatived this suggestion very promptly.

"Why don't you try a glass, Mr. Duncan?" Angie added with malice.

"I'm on the wagon--I mean, I don't drink at all," he said wretchedly;
and was deeply grateful for the diversion afforded by the entrance of a
third customer.

It was Tracey Tanner, as usual swollen with important tidings, as usual
propelling himself through the world at a heavy trot. It has always
been a source of wonderment to me how Tracey manages to keep so stout
with all the violent exercise he takes.

"Say, Angle," he twanged at sight of her, "I've been lookin' for you
everywhere. Did you hear that----"

He stopped instantaneously with open mouth as he saw Duncan behind the
counter; and openmouthed he remained while the young man came round and
advanced toward him, with a bland smirk accompanied by a professional
bow and rubbing of hands.

"May I have the pleasure of serving you, Mr. Tanner?"

"Huh?" bleated Tracey, dumbfounded.

"Is there anything you wish to purchase?"

A violent emotion stirred in Tracey. Sounds began to emanate from his
heaving chest. "N-n-no, ma'am!" he breathed explosively.

Duncan bowed again, his face expressionless. "Then will you be good
enough to excuse me?" He turned precisely and made his way back to the
counter.

As if released from some spell of strong enchantment by the movement,
Tracey swung on his heel and lunged for the door.

"What was it you wanted to ask me, Tracey?" Angie called after him.

As the boy disappeared at a hand-gallop his response floated back: "I
fergit."

"I'm afraid I must have frightened him?" Duncan said inquiringly.

"Oh, no, not at all," Josie reassured him; "he's just gone to tell
everybody you're here."

"Come, Josie, we've been here ever so long." Angie moved slowly toward
the door, but Josie inclined to linger.

"Don't hurry, I beg of you," Duncan interposed.

"Oh, we haven't hurried," she said with a gush of gratification that
startled the man. "You'll remember what I said about the choir, won't
you?"

He braced himself to take advantage of the opening. "I shall never
forget it," he said impressively.

She gave him her hand. "Then good-bye."

"Not good-bye, I trust?" He retained the hand, despising himself
inexpressibly.

"Oh, we'll be in again, won't we Angie?"

"Oh, yes, indeed."

"My land, Angie! What do you think? I'd almost forgotten to pay for the
soda?"

"Please don't speak of it, Miss Lockwood--the pleasure--."

"But I must, Mr. Duncan. How much is it?"

Josie fingered the contents of her purse expectantly, but Duncan hung
in the wind. He had no least notion what might be the price of soda
water. "Two for a quarter?" he hazarded with his disarming grin.

Angle choked with appreciation of this exquisite sally. "Ain't you
funny!"

"I'm afraid you're right," he conceded; "still I'd rather you didn't
think so."

"It's ten cents, isn't it, Mr. Duncan?"

Josie was offering him a dime; he accepted it without question.

"Thank you, very much," said he. "Good afternoon, ladies."

He was aware of Angle's fluttering farewells on the sidewalk. Josie was
lingering on the doorstep in an agony of untrained coquetry. He lowered
his tone for her benefit, thereby adding new weight to his bombardment
of her amateur defences.

"Remember you promised to call again."

Her giggles tore his ear-drums. "Th-thank you, I'm sure," she
stammered, and fled.

They disappeared. He wandered to the chair and threw himself limply
into it. "That voice!" he said stupidly. "That giggle! I've got to woo
and win... _that!_...

"It serves me right," he concluded.

The most hopeless of humours assailed him, and he yielded to it without
a struggle. His attitude expressed his mood with relentless verity.
Chin sunken upon his breast, eyes fairly distilling gloom, legs
stretched out carelessly before him, he sat motionless, suffocating at
the bottom of a gulf of discontent. His lips moved, sometimes
noiselessly, again in whispers barely audible.

"Years of this!... A matter of human endurance--no, superhuman!... If
it wasn't for the bargain, I'd chuck it all and...

"Well, the only way to forget your misery is to work, I suppose."

He pulled himself together and stood up, wondering where he had left
his broom, and simultaneously stiffened with surprise, aware that he
was not alone. A glance, however, established the connection between
the rear door, which stood ajar, and the young woman who stood staring
at him in utterest stupefaction. This, he thought, must be the woman of
the voice, upstairs.

But she couldn't be Graham's wife. She was too young. Even beneath the
mask of care and weariness, the all too plain evidences of privation,
spiritual and mental as well as physical, that Betty wore unceasingly
in those days, he could discern youth and grace and gentleness, and the
nascent promise of prettiness that longed to be, to have the chance to
show itself and claim its meed of deference and love. He was quick to
see the intelligence in her mutinous eyes, and the sweet lines of her
mouth, too often shaped in sullen mould, and no less quick to recognise
that she would carry herself well, with spirit and dignity, once she
were relieved of household toil and moil, once given the chance to
discard her shapeless, bedraggled and threadbare garments for those
dainty and beautiful things for which her starved heart must be sick
with longing....

"Good Lord!" he thought, pitiful, "it's worse here than I dreamed. Old
Graham must need a keeper--and this child has been trying to be that,
with nothing to keep him on."

"Who are you?" the girl demanded sullenly, in a voice a little harsh
and toneless. "What are you doing here? Where's my father?"

"Mr. Graham has stepped out on business," Duncan replied. "You are his
daughter, I believe?"

"Yes, I'm his daughter, but----"

"My name is Nathaniel Duncan. Mr. Graham has been kind enough to take
me on as apprentice, so to speak."

Her stare continued, intense, resentful, undeviating.

"You mean you're going to work here?"

"That my intention, Miss Graham." He nodded gravely.

"What for?"

"To learn the drug business."

"Oh-h!" She flung herself a pace away, impatiently. "I'm not a child,
and I don't want to be talked to like one."

"I didn't mean to annoy you----"

[Illustration: "You mean you're going to work here?"]

"Well, you do. You've got no business in a run-down place like this--
you with your fine clothes and your fine airs. You didn't come here to
learn the drug business; you know as well as I do you've got some other
motive."

There was a truth in that to sting him. He smarted under its lash, but
held his temper in check because he was sorry for the girl. "Perhaps
you're right," he conceded; "perhaps I have some other motive. But
that's neither here nor there. I'm here, and it is my present intention
to learn the drug business in your father's store."

"I don't believe you, Mister Duncan--or whatever your name is."

"I'm sorry," he said patiently.

Betty's lips twitched, contemptuous. "Well, saying you do mean to work
here----"

"I do."

"Where do you think your pay's going to come from?"

"Heaven, perhaps."

"I guess you think that's funny, don't you?"

"I confess, at the moment I did. But now I realise it's probably a
bitter truth."

He was too much for her, she saw, and the knowledge only served to fan
her indignation and suspicions.

"You're making a mistake," she snapped. "Father can't pay you nothing."

"He'll pay me all I'm worth," said Duncan meekly.

She glared at him an instant longer, then mute for lack of a
sufficiently scornful retort, turned and ran back up the steps,
slamming the door behind her.

Duncan drew a rueful face, contemplating the place where she had been.

"I didn't think this was going to be a bed of roses--and it isn't," he
concluded.




X


ROLAND BARNETTE'S FRIEND

Nat had a busy day or two after that, trying to set things to rights in
the store for the better reception and display of the new stock. Sperry
dropped him a line saying that the goods would arrive on the third day,
and there was much to do to make way for it. He managed to get the shop
cleaned up thoroughly with Betty's not unwilling but distinctly
suspicious aid; the girl was apparently convinced that Duncan meant
business, and that this would ostensibly work for her father's benefit,
but she was distinctly dubious as to the _deus ex machina_. Duncan
now and again would catch her watching him, her eyes dark with
speculation; but when she detected his gaze her look would change
instantly to one of hostility and defiance. He suspected that only her
father's wishes prevented an open break with her; as it was he was
conscious that there was no more than an armed truce between them. And
he did not like it; it made him uncomfortable. He wasn't hardened
enough to have an easy conscience, and Betty's open doubts as to the
reason for his coming to Radville disturbed Duncan more than he would
have cared to own.

For all that, they worked together steadily, and accomplished a rather
sensational transformation in the appearance of the place. The floor,
counter and shelves were swept, washed, dusted and garnished with
paint; that is, all but the floor received the attention of the
paint-brush; Duncan managed to smuggle a quantity of oil-cloth into the
shop and get it down before Graham could enter any protest: the effect
approximated tiling nearly enough to brighten the room up wonderfully.
Aside from this the old stock was routed out and, for the greater part,
donated to the rubbish-heap. Teddy Smart, the glazier, was commissioned
to repair the broken window-panes and show-cases. A can of metal polish
freshened up the nickel and brass trimmings and rendered the single
upright of the soda fountain almost attractive. The stove was uprooted
and stored away, and its aspiring pipes dispensed with. Finally, after
considerable argument, Graham consented to the removal of his
work-bench to a shed in the back-yard. The model was suffered to
remain, the tanks and burner being stored out of sight beneath one of
the window-seats, more because Duncan considered it would be a good
thing to have the light than because he understood or attached much
importance to the contrivance. For that matter, he hadn't the time to
listen to an exposition of its advantages, and Graham, recognising
this, was content to abide his time, serene in the conviction that he
would presently find in his assistant a willing and sympathetic
listener.

Between spasms of work Duncan had his hands full attending to the soda
fountain. Soda water being practically the only salable thing in the
store, it had to serve as an excuse for the inquisitiveness of many of
my fellow-citizens, to say nothing of--I should put it, but
especially--their wives and daughters. The consumption of vanilly sody
in those two days broke all known Radville records, and stands a
singular tribute to the Spartan fortitude of Radville womanhood,
particularly the young strata thereof. Duncan, after he had succeeded
in taming the fountain, seemed rather to enjoy than object to
dispensing sody, standing inspection and receiving adulation and
nickels in unequal proportions. By the end of the second day he could
not truthfully have told his friend Willy Bartlett: "The list has
shrunk." It had swollen enormously. There isn't any doubt but that he
had a nodding acquaintance with every pretty girl in town, as well as
with most not considered pretty.

From my window in the _Citizen_ office I was able to keep a
tolerably close account of events and obtain a consensus of public
opinion. So far as the latter bore upon Duncan, it was divided into two
rather distinct parties, one of course favouring him; and this was
feminine almost exclusively. Tracey Tanner, to be sure, confessed
within my hearing to a predilection for the Noo York dood, but was
inclined to hedge and climb the fence when assailed by Roland's
strictures. Roland, I suspect, was a wee mite jealous; he had been
paying attention to--I mean, going with--Josie Lockwood for several
months. Instinctively he must have divined his danger; and it's not in
reason to exact admiration of the usurper from the usurped, even when
the act of usurpation has not yet been definitely consummated. Roland
went to the length of labelling Duncan "sissy," and professed to
believe that Hiram Nutt was justified in calling him a "s'picious
character"; Roland hinted darkly that Duncan knew New York no better
than Will Bigelow.

"And if he did come from there," he asseverated, "I betcher he didn't
leave for no good purpose."

His temper inspired me with the sapient reflection that it's a terrible
thing to be in love, even if only with an old man's millions.

"There's goin' to be a real Noo Yorker here before long," Roland
boasted; "he's comin' to see me on some 'special private bus'ness of
ourn."

"Huh," commented Tracey, the sceptical. "What kind of a Noo Yorker'd
come all the way here to see you?"

"That's all right. You'll see when he gets here. He's a pro-motor."

"A what?"

"A pro-motor, a financier." Roland pronounced it "finnan seer," thus
betraying symptoms of culture and bewildering Tracey beyond expression.

"What's that?" he demanded aggressively.

"That's a feller 't can take nothing at all and incorporate it and make
money out of it," Roland defined with some hesitancy.

"And that's why he's coming down here to take a look at you?" inquired
Tracey, skipping nimbly round the corner.

Curiously enough in my understanding (for I own to no great faith in
Roland's statements, taking them by and large) his friend from New York
put in an unheralded appearance in Radville that same night, on the
evening train. The Bigelow House received him to its figurative bosom
under the name of W.H. Burnham. He sent for Roland promptly and treated
him to a dinner at the hotel; something which I have always regarded as
a punishment several sizes too large for the crime. Later, having
displayed him on the streets in witness to his good faith, Roland spent
the evening with Mr. Burnham mysteriously confabulating behind closed
doors in the hotel. Speculation ran rife through the town until nine
o'clock, and land for several days basked in the heat of public
interest.

I happened accidentally to get a glimpse of Mr. Burnham after supper,
although I had to miss my baked apple in order to get down town in
time. He was a disappointment to some extent, although his mode of
dress attracted much comment as being far more sprightly than Duncan's
and less startling than Roland's. He had a self-confident air and a bit
of swagger that filled the eye, but a face and a voice that detracted,
the one too boldly good-looking, with eyes roving and predaceous, the
other a suggestion too loud and domineering. ... I fear association
with Duncan had vitiated my taste.

However that may be, Roland got an hour off at the bank the following
morning, and the pair of them, after wandering with evident aimlessness
round the town, drifted as it were on the tide of hap-chance into
Graham's drug-store.

Duncan was at the station, superintending the transportation of the new
stock, which had come by the early local; Betty was busy with her
housework upstairs; and only old Sam kept the shop.

Sam wasn't in the best of spirits. His evergreen optimism seldom
withered, but in spite of all that had already been accomplished in
behalf of the store, in spite of the rosier aspect of his declining
fortunes and his confidence in and affection for Duncan, Sam was
worried. He had been over to the bank once, even at that early hour,
but Blinky Lockwood had driven out of town to see about foreclosing one
of his numerous mortgages in the neighbourhood, and his note, which
fell due at the bank that day, was still a weight upon Sam's mind.

Roland and Burnham found him wandering nervously round the store,
alternately taking his hat down from the peg, as if minded to make a
second trip to the bank, and replacing it as he realised that patience
was his part. He looked older and more worn than ordinarily, and seemed
distinctly pleased to be distracted by his callers.

"Why, hello, Roland!" he cried cheerfully, hanging up his hat for
perhaps the twentieth time. And, "How de doo, sir?" he greeted the
stranger.

"Good-morning, sir," said Burnham pleasantly.

"Say, Sam," Roland blundered with his usual adroitness, "this
gentleman------"

Burnham's hand fell heavily on his forearm and he checked as if
throttled.

"What's that, Roland?" Sam turned curiously to them.

"Oh, nothin'; I was--er--just going to say that this gentleman's my
friend from Noo York, Mr. Burnham. I was showin' him round the town and
we just happened to look in."

"The friend you were going to write to about my burner?" inquired Sam.
"Well, I'm right glad to meet you, sir."

It was here that Roland got a look from Mr. Burnham that withered him
completely. His further contributions to the conversation were somewhat
spasmodic and ineffectual.

"Why, no, Mr. Graham," Burnham interposed deftly. "Mr. Barnette must've
been talking of someone else he knew in New York. I----"

"Didn't know he knew more'n one there," Sam observed mildly.

Burnham's glance jumped warily to Sam's face, but withdrew reassured,
having detected therein nothing but the old man's kindly and simple
nature. "At all events," he continued, "I don't remember hearing
anything about the matter (what did you call it? A burner, eh?) from
Mr. Barnette."

"I s'pose Roland forgot," Sam allowed. "He's so busy courtin' our
pretty girls, Mr. Burnham----"

"Yes, that was it," Roland put in hastily, seeing his chance to mend
matters. "I did intend to write you about it, Mr. Burnham, but it kind
of slipped my mind. We've had a lot of important business over to the
bank recently."

"By the way, Roland, did you just come from the bank? Is Mr. Lockwood
back yet?"

"No; I got off this morning. I don't think he is, Sam. Did you want to
see him?"

"Well, yes," Sam admitted. "I guess you know about that, Roland."

"Mean business, sometimes, asking favours of these bankers, eh, Mr.
Graham?" Burnham remarked, much too casually to have deceived anybody
but old Sam.

Graham nodded, dolefully. "Yes, it is unpleasant," he admitted
confidingly. "You see, there's a note of mine come due to-day, and I'm
not able to take care of it or pay the interest just now...." He
thought it over gravely for a moment, then brightened. "But I guess
it'll be all right. Mr. Lockwood's kind, very kind."

"I'm afraid you're a little too sure, Sam," Roland contributed
tactfully. "When there's money due Lockwood, he wants it, and most
times he gets it or its equivalent."

"Yes," Sam assented sadly, "I guess he does, mostly."

"But," Burnham changed the subject adroitly, "what was this--burner,
did you say?--that Mr. Barnette forgot to tell me about?"

"Oh, just one of my inventions, sir."

"I understand you're quite an inventor?"

Sam's smile lightened his face like sunlight striking a snow-bound
field. He nodded slowly, thinking of his past enthusiasms, his hopes
and discouragements. "I've spent most of my life at it, sir, but
somehow nothing has ever turned out well... not so far, I mean. But I
mean to hit it yet."

"That's the way to talk," Burnham cried heartily; "never give up, I
say!... But tell me about some of these inventions, won't you?"

"Wel-l"--Sam knitted his fingers and pursed his lips reflectively--"I
patented a new type threshing machine, once, but I couldn't get anybody
to take hold of it. You see, I haven't any money, Mr. Burnham."

"How would you like to talk it over with me, some time? I'm interested
in such things--as a sort of side issue."

"Will you?" Sam's eagerness was not to be disguised.

"Be glad to. Tell me, how did you get your power?"

"From gas, sir--though coal will do 'most as well. You see, I've got
this burner patented, that makes gas from crude oil--no waste, no odour
nor trouble, and little expense. It'd be cheaper than coal, I thought;
that's why I invented it. I could get steam up mighty quick with that
gas arrangement. I use it for lighting here in the store, now."

"Do you, indeed?" Burnham's tone indicated failing interest, but such
diplomacy was lost on Sam.

"If you've got time, I could show you; it's right over here."

A glance at his watch accompanied Burnham's consent to spare a few
minutes. "There's a telegram I must send presently," he said. "But I'd
like to see this burner, if it won't take long."

"No, not long; just a minute or two." Sam was already dragging the
affair out from under the window box. "You see..."

He went on to expound its virtues with all the fond enthusiasm of a
father showing off his firstborn, and wound up with a demonstration of
the illuminating appliance. I'm afraid, though, he got little
encouragement from Mr. Burnham. He considered the machine with a
dispassionate air, it's true, and admitted its practical advantages,
but wasn't at all disposed to take a roseate view of its future.

"Yes," he grudged, when Sam put a match to the jet, "that's certainly a
very good light."

"All right, ain't it?" chimed Roland, enthusiastic.

"Oh, it may amount to something. It's hard to tell. Of course you know,
sir," he continued, addressing Graham directly, "you've got competition
to overcome."

Sam's old fingers trembled to his chin. "No-o," he said, "I didn't know
that. I've got the patent----"

"Of course that's something. But the Consolidated Petroleum crowd has
another machine, slightly different, which does the same work, and, I
should say, does it better."

"Is--is that so?" quavered Sam. "My patent----."

"Now see here, Mr. Graham," Burnham argued, "we're practical men, both
of us----"

"No; I shouldn't say that about myself," Sam interrupted. "Now you,
sir----I can see you're a man who understands such things. But I----"

"Nevertheless, you must know that a patent isn't everything. You said a
moment ago a man had to have money to make anything out of his
inventions."

"Did I?" Sam interjected, surprised.

"Certainly you did; and dead right you are. A patent's all very well,
but supposing you're up against a powerful competitor like the
Consolidated Petroleum Company. They've got a patent, too. Granted it
may be an infringement of yours even--what can you do against them."

"Why, if it's an infringement----"

"Sue, of course. But do you suppose they're going to lie down just
because an unknown and penniless inventor sues them? Bless you, no!
They'll fight to the last ditch, they'll engage the best legal talent
in the country. You'll have to carry the case to the Supreme Court of
the United States if you want a winning decision. And that's going to
cost you thousands--hundreds of thou-sands--a million----"

"Never mind; a thousand's enough," said Sam gently. "I see what you
mean, sir. It's just another case where I've got no chance."

"Oh, I wouldn't put it as strong as that------"

"But I have no money."

"Still, you never can tell. I'll think it over, if I get time."

"Why, that's kind of you, sir, very kind."

It was at this point that Roland rose to the occasion like the noble
ass he is. Roland never could see more than an inch beyond the end of
his nose.

"Say, Mr. Burnham," he floundered, "don't you think you could help Sam
to----"

"I think," said Mr. Burnham, with additional business of looking at his
watch, "I'd like to send that wire I spoke of."

"Yes, Roland," Sam agreed meekly; "you mustn't keep your friend from
his business. I'm glad you looked in, sir. You'll call again, I hope."

"Thank you," said Burnham, moving toward the door.

It was too much for Roland's sense of opportunity. He rolled in
Burnham's wake, sullenly reluctant. "Say, Mr. Burnham," he exploded as
they got to the door, "if you'll just offer Sam five----"

_"That will do!"_ Roland collapsed as if punctured. Burnham turned
to Graham with a wave of his hand. "I'm leaving on the afternoon train,
but if I get time I may drop in again and talk things over with you.
There might be something in that threshing machine you mentioned."

"I'll be glad to show you anything I've got here..."

"All right. Good-day. I'll see you again, perhaps."

This cavalier snub was lost on Sam, an essential of whose serene soul
is the quality of humility. He followed them to the door, as grateful
as a lost dog for a stray pat instead of a kick. "Good-day, sir.
Good-day, Roland," he sped their parting cheerfully.

But it was a broken man who shut the door behind them and turned back,
fingering his grey chin. There must have been a dimness in his eyes and
a quiver to his wide-lipped, generous mouth.

"Perhaps Mr. Burnham was right. Only I was kind of hopin'... Now Mr.
Lockwood over there..."

He shook himself to throw off the spell of depression and somehow
managed to quicken again his abiding faith in the essential goodness of
the world.

"Well, well! He's kind, very kind."

He began to restore his model to its hiding place, musing upon the
ebb-tide in his affairs in his muddle-headed way, and in the process
managed to convince himself that "it 'ud all come right."

"With this young man in here, and everythin' gettin' fixed up, and new
stock comin' in ... I'm sure Mr. Lockwood'll see it the right way ...
for us.... He's kind, very kind."

Thus it was that he presently called up the stairs in a very cheerful
voice: "Betty, are you pretty near through up there?"

The girl's weary voice came down to him without accent: "Yes, father,
almost."

"Well, then, you keep an eye on the store, please. I'm goin' to step
out for a minute."

"Yes, father."

"And if--if anybody asks for me, I'll most likely be down to the depot,
with Mr. Duncan."

He didn't mention that he contemplated calling on Lockwood, because he
feared it might worry Betty. ... As if a woman doesn't always
understand when things are going wrong!

Betty knew, or rather divined. And she had no hope, no faith such as
made Sam what he was. She came down the steps listlessly, overborne by
her knowledge of the world's wrongness. The glance with which she
comprehended the renovated shop was bitter with contempt. What was the
worth of all this? Nothing good would come of it; nothing good came of
anything. Life was drab and dreary, made up of weary, profitless years
and months and weeks and days, to each its appointed disappointment.

Only her sense of duty sustained her. She owed something to old Sam for
the gift of life, dismal though she found it. He needed her; what she
could do for him she would. I have always thought that her affection
for her father was less filial than maternal. He seemed such a child,
she--so very old! She mothered him; it was her only joy to care for
him. Her care was constant, unfailing, omniscient. In return she got
only his love. But it was almost enough--almost, not quite, dearly as
she prized it. There were other things a girl should have--indeed, must
have, if her life were to be rounded out in fulness. And these, she
understood, were forever denied her: apples of Paradise growing in her
sight, heartrending in their loveliness so far beyond her reach....

Sighing, she went to work. In work only could she forget.... The soda
glasses needed cleaning, and the syrup jars replenishing (for the new
order of syrups had come in the previous evening).

After a time, to a tune of pounding feet, Tracey Tanner pranced into
the shop with all the graceful abandon of a young elephant feeling its
oats. His face was fairly scarlet from exertion and his eyes bulging
with a sense of importance. The girl looked up without interest,
nodding slightly in response to his breathless: "'Lo, Betty."

"Father's gone out," she said, holding a glass to the light, suspicious
of the lint from her dish towel.

"I know--seen him down the street." The boy halted at the counter,
producing a handful of square envelopes. "Note for you from the
Lockwoods, Betty," he panted. "Josie ast me to bring it round."

Betty put down her glass in consternation. From the Lockwoods?"

"Uh-huh." Tracey offered it, but she withheld her hand, dubious.

"For me, Tracey?"

"Uh-huh. It's a ninvitation. I got four more to take." He thrust it
into her reluctant fingers. "Got five, really, but one of 'em's for
me."

"An invitation, Tracey!"

"Yeh. Hope you have a good time when it comes off." Already he was
bouncing toward the door. "Goo'-bye."

"But what is it, Tracey?"

"Aw, it tells in the ninvitation. S'long."

"From the Lockwoods!" she whispered.

Suddenly she tore it open, her hands unsteady with nervousness.

The envelope contained a square of heavy cardboard of a creamy tint
with scalloped edges touched with gold. On the face of the card a round
and formless hand had traced with evident pains the information:

Miss Josephine Mae Lockwood

Requests the Pleasure of your Company at a Lawn Fete and Dance to be
held at the residence of her Parents, Mr. & Mrs. Geo. Lockwood,
Saturday July 15, at 8 p. m. R.S.V.P.

The envelope fluttered to the floor while the card was crushed between
the girl's hands. For a moment her face was transfigured with delight,
her eyes blank with rapturous visions of the joys of that promised
night.

"Oh!... it 'ud be grand!..."

Then suddenly the light faded. Her eyes clouded, her face settled into
its discontented lines. She stuffed the card heedlessly into the pocket
of her dingy apron, and took up another glass.

"But I can't go; I've got nothin' to wear...."




XI


BLINKY LOCKWOOD

She was scrubbing blindly at the same glass when, a quarter of an hour
later, Blinky Lockwood strode into the store, his right eye twitching
more violently than usual, as it always does in his phases of mental
disturbance--as when, for instance, he fears he's going to lose a
dollar.

Lockwood is that type of man who was born to grow rich. He inherited a
farm or two in the vicinity of Radville and the one over Westerly way,
to which I have referred, and ... well, we've a homely paraphrase of a
noted aphorism in Radville: "Them as has, gits." Lockwood had, to begin
with, and he made it his business to get; and, as is generally the case
in this unbalanced world of ours, things came to him to which he had
never aspired. Fortune favoured him because he had no need of her
favours; the discovery of coal under his Westerly acres was wholly
adventitious, but it made him far and away the richest man in
Radville--with the possible exception of old Colonel Bohun's
traditional millions.

In person he is as beautiful as a snake-fence, as alluring as a stone
wall. Something over six feet in height, he walks with a stoop (one
hand always in a trouser-pocket jingling silver) that materially
detracts from his stature. His face, like his figure, is gaunt and
lanky, his nose an emaciated beak; his mouth illustrates his attitude
toward property--is a trap from which nothing of value ever escapes;
his eyes are small and hard and set close together under lowering
brows. He's grizzled, with hair not actually white, but grey as the iron
from which his heart was fashioned. Aside from these characteristics his
principal peculiarity is a nervous twitching of the right eye which has
earned him his sobriquet of Blinky. Legrand Gunn said he contracted the
affliction through squinting at the silver dollar to make sure none of
its milling had been worn off. ... I have never known the man to wear
anything but a rusty old frock coat, black, of course, and black and
shiny broadcloth trousers, with a hat that has always a coating of dust
so thick that it seems a mottled grey.

He grunts his words, a grunt to each. He grunted at Betty when he saw
her.

"Where's your father?"

She put down her glass and dish-rag. "I don't know, sir."

"Don't know, eh?" he asked in an indescribably offensive tone.

"I think he went to the bank to see you."

"Oh, he did, eh? Did he have anything for me."

The girl took up another glass. "I don't know, sir," she said wearily.
"I'm afraid not."

"Well, if he didn't there's no use see in' me. It won't do him any
good."

"I guess he knows that," she returned with a little flash of spirit.

Lockwood looked her up and down as if he had never seen her before,
then summarised his resentful impression of her attitude in an open
sneer. "Does, eh? Well, that's a good thing; saves talk."

She contained herself, saying nothing. He glared round the place,
remarking the improvements.

"You don't do no business here, not to speak of, do ye?"

"No," she admitted without interest, "not to speak of."

"Then what's the good of all this foolishness, fixing up?"

"I don't know."

"Costs money, don't it?"

"I guess so."

"And that money belongs to me."

"It's Mr. Duncan's doing. Father ain't paying for it. He can't."

"What's he doin', then? Sittin' round foolin' with his inventions,
ain't he?"

"Yes."

"What's he inventin' now?"
"I don't know much about it." She pointed to the model beneath the
window. "That's the last thing, I guess."

Blinky snorted and stamped over to the window, stooping to peer at the
machine. "What's the good of that?" he demanded, disdainful; and
without waiting for her response went on nagging. "Foolishness! That's
what it is. Why don't you tell him not to waste his time this way?"

"Because he likes it," said Betty hopelessly. "It's the only thing that
makes life worth while to him. So I let him alone."

"What difference does that make? It don't bring him in nothin', does
it?"

"No ..."

"Nor do any good?"

"No."

"No, siree, it don't. He'd oughter stop it. What does he do with them
things when he gets 'em finished?"

"Patents them."

"And then what?"

"Nothin' that I know of."

"That's it; nothing--nor ever will. Well, he's been getting money from
me for those patents--I thought at fust there might be somethin' in
'em--but he won't any more. I'd oughter had more sense."

A little colour spotted the girl's sallow cheeks. "He'd never ha' got
money from you if he hadn't thought he could pay it back," she told
Blinky hotly.

"No, nor if I hadn't thought he could----"

She interjected a significant "Huh!" He broke off abruptly, pale with
anger.

"Well, I want to see him, and I want to see him before noon," he
snapped. "I'm goin' over to the bank, an' if he knows what's good for
him he'll come there pretty darn quick."

"I'll try to find him for you; he must be somewhere round," she
offered.

"Well, you better. I ain't got much patience to-day."

He swung on one heel and slouched out, as Betty turned to go upstairs.
Presently she reappeared pinning on her sad little hat, and left the
store.

It was upwards of an hour before she returned, walking quickly and very
erect, with her head up and shoulders back, her eyes suspiciously
bright, the spots of colour in her cheeks blazing scarlet, her mouth
set and hard, the little work-worn hands at her sides clenched tightly
as if for self-control. Even old Sam, who had returned from the depot
after missing Blinky at the bank--even he, blind as he ordinarily was,
saw instantly that something was wrong with the child.

"Why, Betty!" he cried in solicitude as she flung into the
store--"Betty, dear, what's the matter?"

For an instant she seemed speechless. Then she tore the hat from her
head and cast it regardlessly upon the counter. "Father!" she cried.
"Father!"--and gulped to down her emotion. "Can you get me some money?"

"Money? Why, Betty, what--?"

Her foot came down on the floor impatiently. "Can you get me some
money?" she repeated in a breath.

"Well--er--how much, Betty?" He tried to touch her, to take her to his
arms, but she moved away, her sorry little figure quivering from head
to feet.

"Enough," she said, half sobbing--"enough to buy a dress--a nice
dress--a dress that will surprise folks--"

"But tell me what the matter is, Betty. Wanting a dress would never
upset you like this."

She whipped the cracked and crumpled card from her pocket and pushed it
into his hand. "Look at that!" she bade him, and turned away,
struggling with all her might to keep back the tears.

He read, his old face softening. "Josie Lockwood's party, eh? And she's
sent you an invitation. Well, that was kind of her, very kind."

She swung upon him in a fury. "No, it was not kind. It was mean... It
was mean!"

"Oh, Betty," he begged in consternation, "don't say that. I'm sure--"

"Oh, you don't know... I heard the girls talking in the post-office--
Angle Tuthill and Mame Garrison and Bessie Gabriel... I was round by
the boxes where they couldn't see me, but I could hear them, and they
were laughing because I was invited. They said the reason Josie did it
was because she knew I didn't have anything to wear, and she wanted to
hear what excuse I'd make for not going. Ah, I heard them!"

"Oh, but Betty, Betty," he pleaded; "don't you mind what they say.
Don't--"

"But I do mind; I can't help mindin'. They're mean." She paused, her
features hardening. "I'm going to that party," she declared tensely:
"I'm goin' to that party and--and I'm goin' to have a dress to go in,
too! I don't care what I do--I'm goin' to have that dress!"

Sam would have soothed her as best he might, but she would neither look
at nor come near him.

"We'll see," he said gently. "We'll see. I'll try--"

She turned on him, exasperated beyond thought. "That only means you
can't help me!"

"Oh, no, it doesn't. I'll do what I can--"

"Have you got any money now?"

He hung his head to avoid her blazing eyes. "Well, no--not at present,
but here's this new stock and--."

"That doesn't mean anything, and you know it. You owe that note to Mr.
Lockwood, don't you? And you can't pay it?"

"Not to-day, Betty, but he'll give me a little more time, I'm sure.
He's kind, very kind."

"You don't know him. He's as mean--as mean as dirt--as mean as Josie."

"Betty!"

"Then if you did get any money you'd have to give it to him, wouldn't
you?"

"Yes, but--I'm sure--I think it'll come all right."

"Ah, what's the use of talkin' that way? What's the use of talkin' at
all? I know you can't do anything for me, and so do you!"

Sam had dropped into his chair, unable to stand before this storm; he
stared now, mute with amazement, at this child who had so long, so
uncomplainingly, shared his poverty and privations, grown suddenly to
the stature of a woman--and a tormented, passionate woman, stung to the
quick by the injustice of her lot. He put out a hand in a feeble
gesture of placation, but she brushed it away as she bent toward him,
speaking so quickly that her words stumbled and ran into one another.

"I can't understand it!" she raged. "Why is it that I have to be more
shabby than any other girl in town? Why is it that the others have all
the fun and I all the drudgery? Why is it that I can't ever go anywhere
with the boys and girls and laugh and--and have a good time like the
rest do?..."

Sam bent his head to the blast. In his lap his hands worked nervously.
But he could not answer her.

"It ain't that I mind the cookin' and doin' the housework and--all the
rest--but--why is it you can never give me anything at all? Why must it
be that everyone looks down on us and sneers and laughs at us? Why is
it that half the time we haven't got enough to eat?... Other men manage
to take care of their families and give their children things to wear.
You've got only us two to look after, and you can't even do that. It
isn't right, it isn't decent, and if I were you I'd be ashamed of
myself--!"

Her temper had spent itself, and with this final cry she checked
abruptly, with a catch at her breath for shame of what she had let
herself say. But, childlike, she was not ready to own her sorrow; and
she turned her back, trembling.

Sam, too, was shaken. In his heart he knew there was justification for
her indictment, truth in what she had said. And he was heartbroken for
her. He got up unsteadily and put a gentle hand upon her shoulder.

"Why, Betty--I--I--"

A dry sob interrupted him. He pulled himself together and forced his
voice to a tone of confidence. "Just be a little patient, dear. I'm
sure things will be better with us, soon. Just a little more patience--
that's all... Why, there was a gentleman here this morning, from Noo
York City, talkin' about an invention of mine."

The girl moved restlessly, shaking off his hand. "Invention!" she
echoed bitterly. "Oh, father! Everybody knows they're no good. You've
been wastin' time on 'em ever since I can remember, and you've never
made a dollar out of one yet."

He bowed to the truth of this, then again braced up bravely. "But this
gentleman seemed quite interested. He's over to the Bigelow House now.
I think I'll step over and have a talk with him--"

"You'd much better go and have a talk with Blinky Lockwood," she told
him brutally. "He's waitin' for you at the bank, and said he wasn't
goin' to wait after twelve o'clock, neither!"

"Wel-l, perhaps you're right. I'll go there. It's after twelve, but..."
He started to get his hat and stopped with an exclamation: "Why, Nat!
I didn't know you'd got back!"

Duncan was at the back of the store, clearing the last remnants of the
old stock from the shelves. "Yes," he said pleasantly, without turning,
"I've been here some time, cleaning up the cellar, to make room for the
stuff that's coming in. I came upstairs just a moment ago, but you were
so busy talking you didn't notice me."

He paused, swept the empty shelves with a calculating glance, and came
out around the end of the counter. "Everything's in tip-top shape," he
said. "I checked up the bill of lading myself, and there's not a thing
missing, not a bit of breakage. Mr. Graham," he continued, dropping a
gentle hand on the old man's shoulder, "you're going to have the finest
drug-store in the State within six months. With the stuff that Sperry
has sent us we can make Sothern and Lee look like sixty-five cents on
the dollar.... We're going to make things hum in this old shop, and
don't you forget it." He laughed lightly, with a note of encouragement.
But he avoided Graham's eyes even as he did Betty's. He could not meet
the pitiful look of the former, any more than that stare of hostility
and defiance in the latter.

"It's good of you, my boy," Graham quavered. "I--but I'm afraid it
won't----"

"Now don't say that!" Duncan interposed firmly. "And don't let me
keep you. I think you said you were going out on business? And I'll be
busy enough right here."

And without exactly knowing how it had come about, Graham found himself
in the street, stumbling downtown, toward the bank.

When he had gone, Duncan would have returned to the shelves for a final
redding-up. He desired least of all things an encounter with Betty in
her present frame of mind, and he tried his level best to seem as one
who had heard nothing, who was only concerned with his occupation of
the moment. But from the instant that she had been made aware of his
presence Betty had been watching him with smouldering eyes, wondering
how much he had heard and what he was thinking of her. The keen
repentance that gnawed at her heart, allied with shame that an alien
should have been private to her exhibition, half maddened the child.
With a sudden movement she threw herself in front of Duncan, thrusting
her white, drawn face before his, her gaze searching his half in anger,
half in morose distrust.

"So you were listening!"

"I'm sorry," he said uncomfortably.

She drew a pace away, holding herself very straight while she threw him
a level glance of unqualified contempt.

"I didn't mean to hear anything," he argued plaintively. "I was in
the room before I understood, and by the time I did, it was too late--
you had finished."

"Oh, don't try to explain. I--I hate you!"

He held her eyes inquiringly. "Yes," he said in the tone of one who
solves a puzzling problem, "I believe you do."

She looked away, shaking with passion. "You just better believe it."

"But," he went on quietly, "you don't hate your father, too, do you,
Miss Graham?"

She swung back to meet his stare with one that flamed with indignation.

"What do you mean by that, Mr. Duncan?"

"I mean," he said, faltering in where one wiser would have feared to
venture--"I'm going to give you a bit of advice. Don't you talk to your
father again the way you did just now."

"What business is that of yours?"

"None," he admitted fairly. "But just the same I wouldn't, if I were
you."

"Well, you ain't me!" she cried savagely. "You ain't me! Understand
that? When I want advice from you, I'll ask for it. Until I do, you
let me alone."

"Very well," he replied, so calmly that she lost her bearings for a
moment. And inevitably this, emphasising as it did all that she
resented most in him--his education, wit, address, his advantages of
every sort--only served further to infuriate the child.

"Oh, I know why you talk that way," she said, rubbing her poor little
hands together.

"Do you?" he asked in wonder.

"Yes, I do--you!..."

Suddenly she found words--poverty-stricken words, it's true, but the
best she had wherewith to express herself. And for a little they flowed
from her lips, a scalding, scathing torrent. "It's because you go to
church all the time and try to look like a saint and--and try to make
out you're too religious for anything, and like to hear yourself givin'
Christian advice to poor miserable sinners--like me. You think that's
just too lovely of you. That's why you said it, if you want to know.
... Folks wonder what you're doing here, don't they? Guess you know
that--and like it, too. It makes 'em look at you and talk about you,
and that's what you like. _I_ could tell 'em. You're only here to
show off your good clothes and your finger-nails and the way you part
your hair and--and all the other things you do that nobody in Noo York
would pay any attention to!"

He faced her soberly, attentively. She was a little fool, he knew, and
making a ridiculous figure of herself. But--his innate honesty told him
--she was right, in a way; she had hit upon his weakest point. He was
in Radville to "show off," as she would have said, to make an
impression and ... to reap the reward thereof. The way she spoke was
ludicrous, but what she said was mostly plain truth. He nodded
submissively.

"A pretty good guess at that," he acknowledged candidly.

"Yes, it is, and I know it, and you know it. ... Oh, it's easy enough
to give advice when you've got plenty of money and fine clothes and ...
but..."

"I understand," he said when she paused to get a grip upon herself and
find again the words she needed. "You needn't say any more. The only
reason I said what I did was because I'm strong for your father and ...
well, I wanted to do you a good turn, too."

"I don't want any of your good turns!"

"Then I apologise."

"And I don't want your apologies, neither!"

"All right, only ... think over what I said, some time."

"I had a good reason for saying what I did."

"I know you had."

"You know I had!" She looked at him askance. She had been on the point
of relenting a little, of calming, of being a bit ashamed of herself.
But his quiet acquiescence rekindled her resentment. "How do you know?
You!" she said bitterly.


"Because I'm not what you think I am, altogether."

"I guess you're not," she observed acidly.

"But I don't mean what you mean. I mean you think I'm conceited and
rich and don't know what trouble is. Well, you're mistaken. I've been
up against it the worst way for five years, and I know just how it
feels to see other people getting up in the world when you're at the
bottom of the heap with no chance of squirming out--to know that they
have things you haven't got any chance of getting. I've been through
the mill myself. Why, I've kept out of the way for days and days rather
than let my prosperous friends see how shabby I was. Many's the time
I've dodged round corners to avoid meeting men I knew would invite me
to have dinner or luncheon or a drink--of soda--or something, for fear
they'd find out that I couldn't treat in return. Many a time I've gone
hungry for days and weeks and slept on park benches ... until an old
friend found me and took me home with him."

The ring of sincerity in his manner and tone silenced the girl,
impressed her with the conviction of his absolute sincerity. The tumult
in her mind quieted. She eyed him with attention, even with interest
temporarily untinged with resentment. And seeing that he had succeeded
in gaining this much ground in her regard, Duncan dared further,
pushing his advantage to its limits.

"But it's your father I wanted to talk about," he hurried on. "I'd bet
a lot he knows more than any other man in this town; and besides, he's
a fine, square, good-hearted old gentleman. Anybody can see that.
Only, he's got one terrible fault: he doesn't know how to make money.
And that's mighty tough on you--though it's just as tough on him. But
when you roast him for it, like you did just now ... you only make him
feel as miserable as a yellow dog ... and that doesn't help matters a
little bit. He can't change into a sharp business crook now; ... he's
too old a man. ... Before long he ... he won't be with you at all and
... when he's gone you'll be sore on yourself ... sure! ... if you keep
on throwing it into him the way I heard you. ... And that's on the
level."

He paused in confusion; the role of preacher sat upon him awkwardly, a
sadly misfit garment. He felt self-conscious and ill at ease, yet with
a trace of gratulation through it all. For he felt he'd carried his
point. He could see no longer any animus in the pale, wistful little
face that looked up into his--only sympathy, understanding, repentance
and (this troubled him a bit) a faint flush of dawning admiration.
Presently she grew conscious of herself again, and looked aside, humbled
and distressed.

"I--I won't do it again," she faltered, twisting her hands together.

"Bully for you!" he cried, and with an abrupt if artificial resumption
of his business-like air turned away to a show-case--to spare her the
embarrassment of his regard.

"I didn't think," said the voice behind him; "I didn't mean to--
something happened that almost drove me wild and..."

"I know," he said gently.

After a bit she spoke again: "I'll go up and get dinner ready now."

"That's all right," he returned absently. "I'll tend the store."

He heard her footsteps as she crossed to the door and opened it. There
followed a pause. Then she came hurriedly back. He faced about to meet
her eyes shining with wonder.

"I wanted to ask you," she said hastily, "if--was it this friend you
spoke about--that found you in the park--who set you on the road to
fortune?"

"That's what he said," Duncan answered, twisting his brows whimsically.




XII


DUNCAN'S GRUBSTAKE

Like almost all business Radville, Duncan went home for his midday
meal. It wasn't much of a walk from Sam Graham's store to Miss
Carpenter's, and he didn't mind in the least.

On this particular day he was sincerely hungry, but he had much to
think about besides, and between the two he just bolted his food and
made off, hot-foot for the store, greatly to the distress of his
landlady.

Naturally, knowing nothing about Sam's note, although he knew Pete
Willing by sight as the sheriff and town drunkard in one, it didn't
worry him at all to discover that gentleman tacking toward the store as
he hurried up Beech Street, eager to get back to his job. The first
intimation that he had of anything seriously amiss was when he entered,
practically on Pete's heels.

Pete Willing is the best-natured man in the world, as a general rule;
drunk or sober, Radville tolerates him for just that quality. On only
two occasions is he irritable and unmanageable: when his wife gets
after him about the drink (Mrs. Willing is an able-bodied lady of Irish
descent, with a will and a tongue of her own, to say nothing of
an arm a blacksmith might envy) and when he has a duty to perform in
his official capacity. It is in the latter instance that he rises
magnificently to the dignity of his position. The majesty of the law in
his hands becomes at once a bludgeon and a pandemonium. No one has ever
been arrested in Radville, since Pete became sheriff, without the
entire community becoming aware of it simultaneously. Pete's voice in
moments of excitement carries like a cannonade. Legrand Gunn said that
Pete had only to get into an argument in front of the Bigelow House to
make the entire disorderly population of the Flats, across the river,
break for the hills. (This is probably an exaggeration.)

Tall, gaunt, gangling and loose-jointed, Duncan found Pete standing in
the middle of the floor, hands in pockets and a noisome stogie thrust
into a corner of his mouth, swaying a little (he was almost sober at
the moment) and explaining his mission to old Sam in a voice of
thunder.

"I'm sorry about this, Sam," he bellowed, "but there ain't no use
wastin' words 'bout it. I'm here on business."

"But what's the matter, Sheriff?" Graham asked, his voice breaking.

"Ah, you know you got a note due at the bank, don't you?"

"Yes, but----"

"Well, it's protested. Y'un'erstand that, don't you?"

"Why, Pete!" Graham swayed, half-dazed.

"An' I'm here to serve the papers onto you."

"But--but there must be some mistake." Sam clutched blindly for his
hat. "I'll step over and see Mr. Lockwood. He'll arrange to give me a
little more time, I'm sure. He's always been kind, very kind."

"Naw!" Pete bawled, "Mr. Lockwood don't want to see you unless you can
settle. Y'can save yourself the trouble. Y'gottuh put up or git out!"

"But, Pete--Mr. Lockwood said he didn't want to see me?"

"Yah, that's what he said, and I got orders from him, soon's I got
judgment to close y'up. And that goes, see!"

"To--to turn me out of the store, Pete?" Graham's world had slipped
from beneath his feet. He was overwhelmed, witless, as helpless as a
child. And it was with a child's look of pitiful dismay and perplexity
that he faced the sheriff.

The father who has fallen short of his child's trust and confidence
knows that look. To Duncan its appeal was irresistible. He had his
hand in his pocket, clutching the still considerable remains of what
Kellogg had termed his grubstake, before he knew it.

"But--there must be some mistake," Graham repeated pleadingly. "It
can't be--Mr. Lockwood surely wouldn't----"

"Now there ain't no use whinin' about it!" Willing roared him into
silence. "Law is Law, and----" He ceased quickly, surprised to find
Duncan standing between him and his prey. "What----!" he began.

"Wait!" Duncan touched him gently on the chest with a forefinger, at
the same time catching and holding the sheriff's eye. "Are you," he
inquired quietly, "labouring under the impression that Mr. Graham is
deaf?"

"What----!"

Duncan turned to Sam, apologetically. "He said 'what.' Did you hear it,
sir?"

But by this time Pete was recovering to some degree. "What've you got
to say about this?" he demanded, crescendo.

"I'll show you," Duncan told him in the same quiet voice, "what I've
got to say if you'll just put the soft pedal on and tell me the amount
of that note."

Pete struggled mightily to regain his vanished advantage, but try as he
would he could not escape Duncan's cool, inquisitive eye. Visibly he
lost importance as he yielded and dived into his pocket. "With interest
and costs," he said less stridently, "it figgers up three hundred 'n'
eighty dollars 'n' eighty-two cents."

There's no use denying that Duncan was staggered. For the moment his
poise deserted him utterly. He could only repeat, as one who dreams:
_"Three hundred and eighty dollars!..."_

His momentary consternation afforded Pete the opening he needed. The
room shook with his regained sense of prestige.

"Yes, three hundred 'n' eighty dollars 'n'--say, you look a-here!----"

Again the calm forefinger touched him, and like a hypnotist's pass
checked the rolling volume of noise. "Listen," begged Duncan: "if
you've got anything else to tell me, please retire to the opposite side
of the street and whisper it. Meanwhile, _be quiet!"_

Pete's jaw dropped. In all his experience no one had ever succeeded in
taming him so completely--and in so brief a time. He experienced a
sensation of having been robbed of his spinal column, and before he
could pull himself together was staring in awe, while with one final
admonitory poke of his finger Duncan turned and made for the soda
counter, beneath which was the till. His scanty roll of bills was in
his right hand, and there concealed. He stepped behind the counter (old
Sam watching him with an amazement no less absolute than Pete's),
pulled out the till, bent over it with an assured air, and pushed back
the coin slide. Then quite naturally, he produced--with his right
hand--his four-hundred-and-odd dollars from the bill drawer, stood up
and counted them with great deliberation.

"One ... two ... three ... four."
He smiled winningly at Pete. "Four hundred dollars, Mr. Sheriff. Now
will you be good enough to hand over that note and the change and then
put yourself, and that pickle you're wearing in your face, on the other
side of the door?"

Pete struggled tremendously and finally succeeded in producing from
his system a still, small voice:

"I ain't got the note with me, Mr. Duncan."

"Then perhaps you won't mind going to the bank for it?"

Half suffocated, Pete assented. "Aw'right, I'll go and git it. Kin I
have the money?"

"Certainly." Duncan extended the bills, then on second thought withheld
them. "I presume you're a regular sheriff?" he inquired.

Very proudly Pete turned back the lapel of his coat and distended the
chest on which shone his nickel-plated badge of office. Duncan examined
it with grave admiration.

"It's beautiful," he said with a sigh. "Here."

Gingerly, Pete grasped the bills, thumbed them over to make sure they
were real, and bolted as for his life, his coat-tails level on the
breeze.

[Illustration: "Four hundred dollars, Mr. Sheriff"]

There floated back to Duncan and old Sam his valedictory: "Wal, I'll be
damned!"

With a short, quiet laugh Duncan made as though to go out to the
back-yard, where the new stock was being delivered, having been carted
up from the station through the alley--thereby doing away with the
necessity of cluttering up the store with a debris of packing. His
primal instinct of the moment was to get right out of that with all the
expedition practicable. He didn't want to be alone with old Sam another
second. The essential insanity of which he had just done was patent;
there was no excuse for it, and he was like to suffer severely as a
consequence. But he wasn't sorry, and he did not want to be thanked.

"I'm going," he said hurriedly, "to find me a hatchet and knock the
stuffing out of some of those packing-cases. Want to get all that truck
indoors before nightfall, you know----"

But old Sam wasn't to be put off by any such obvious subterfuge as
that. He put himself in front of Duncan.

"Nat, my boy," he said, tremulous, "I can't let this go through--I
can't allow you----"

"There, now!" Duncan told him, unconcernedly yet kindly, "don't say
anything more. It's over and done with."

"But you mustn't--I'll turn over the store to you, if----"

"O Lord!" Duncan's dismay was as genuine as his desire to escape
Graham's gratitude. "No--don't! Please don't do that!"

"But I must do something, my boy. I can't accept so great a kindness--
unless," said Graham with a timid flash of hope--"you'll consider a
partnership----"

"That's it!" cried Duncan, glad of any way out of the situation.
"That's the way to do it--a partnership. No, please don't say any more
about it, just now. We can settle details later. ... We've got to get
busy. Tell you what I wish you'd do while I'm busting open those boxes:
if you don't mind going down to the station to make sure that
everything's----"

"Yes, I'll go; I'll go at once." Sam groped for Duncan's hand, caught
and held it between both his own. "If--if fate--or something hadn't
brought you here to-day--I don't know what would've happened to Betty
and me. ..."

"Never mind," Duncan tried to soothe him. "Just don't you think about
it."

Graham shook his head, still bewildered. "Perhaps," he stumbled on, "to
a gentleman of your wealth four hundred dollars isn't much----"

"No," said Duncan gravely, without the flicker of an eyelash:
"nothing." Then he smiled cheerfully. "There, that's all right."

"To me it's meant everything. I--I only hope I'll be able to repay
you some day. God bless you, my boy, God bless you!"

He managed to jam his hat awry on his white old head and found his way
out, his hands fumbling with one another, his lips moving inaudibly--
perhaps in a prayer of thanksgiving.

Motionless, Duncan watched him go, and for several minutes thereafter
stood without stirring, lost in thought. Then his quaint, deprecatory
grin dawned. He found a handkerchief and mopped his forehead.

"Whew!" he whistled. "I wouldn't go through that again for a million
dollars."

Gradually the smile faded. He puckered his brows and drew down the
corners of his mouth. Thoughtfully he ran a hand into his pocket and
produced the little crumpled wad of bills of small denominations,
representing all he had left in the world. Smoothing them out on the
counter, he arranged them carefully, summing up; then returned them to
his pocket.

"Harry," he observed--"Harry said I couldn't get rid of that stake in a
year!...

"He doesn't know what a fast town this is!"




XIII


THE BUSINESS MAN AND MR. BURNHAM

It was, perhaps, within the next thirty minutes that Betty (who had
been left in charge of the store while Duncan, with coat and collar off
and sleeves rolled above his elbows, hacked and pounded and pried and
banged at the packing-cases in the backyard) sought him on the scene of
his labours.

She waited quietly, a little to one side, watching him, until he should
become aware of her presence. What she was thinking would have been
hard to define, from the inscrutable eyes in her set, tired face of a
child. There was no longer any trace of envy, suspicion or resentment
in her attitude toward the young man. You might have guessed that she
was trying to analyse him, weighing him in the scales of her
impoverished and lopsided knowledge of human nature, and wondering if
such conclusions as she was able to arrive at were dependable.

In the course of time he caught sight of that patient, sad little
figure, and, pausing, panting and perspiring under the July sun,
cheerfully brandished his weapon from the centre of a widespread
area of wreckage and destruction.

"Pretty good work for a York dude--not?" he laughed.

There was a shadowy smile in her grave eyes. "It's an improvement," she
said evenly.

He shot her a curious glance. "_Ouch!_" he said thoughtfully.

"I just came to tell you," she went on, again immobile, "you're wanted
inside."

"Somebody wants to see _me?_" he demanded of her retreating back.

"Yes."

"But who--?"

"Blinky Lockwood," she replied over her shoulder, as she went into the
house.

"Lockwood?" He speculated, for an instant puzzled. Then suddenly:
"Father-in-law!" he cried. "Shivering snakes! he mustn't catch me like
this! I, a business man!"

Hastily rolling down his shirt-sleeves and shrugging himself into his
coat, he made for the store, buttoning his collar and knotting his tie
on the way.

He found Blinky nosing round the room, quite alone. Betty had
disappeared, and the old scoundrel was having quite an enjoyable time
poking into matters that did not concern him and disapproving of them
on general principles. So far as the improvements concerned old Sam
Graham's fortunes, Blinky would concede no health in them. But with
regard to Duncan there was another story to tell: Duncan apparently
controlled money, to some vague extent.

"You're Mr. Duncan, ain't you?" he asked with his leer, moving down to
meet Nat.

"Yes, sir. Mr. Lockwood, I believe?"

"That's me." Blinky clutched his hand in a genial claw. "I'm glad to
meet you."

"Thank you," said Duncan. "Something I can do for you, sir?"

"Wal, Pete Willin' was tellin' me you'd just took up this note of
Graham's?"

"Not exactly; the firm took it up."

Blinky winked savagely at this. "The firm? What firm?"

"Graham and Duncan, sir. I've been taken into partnership."

"Have, eh?" Blinky grunted mysteriously and fished in his pocket for
some bills and silver. "Wal, here's some change comin' to the firm,
then; and here," he added, producing the document in question, "is
Sam's note."

"Thank you." Duncan ceremoniously deposited both in the till, going
behind the soda fountain to do so, and then waited, expectant. Blinky
was grunting busily in the key of one about to make an important
communication.

"I'm glad you're a-comin' in here with Sam," he said at length, with an
acid grimace that was meant to be a smile.

"Oh, it may be only temporary." Nat endeavoured to assume a seraphic
expression, and partially succeeded. "I'm devoting much of my time to
my studies," he pursued primly; "but nevertheless feel I should be
earning something, too."

"That's right; that's the kind of spirit I like to see in a young
man.... You always go to church, don't you?"

"No, sir--Sundays only."

"That's what I mean. D'you drink?"

"Oh, no, sir," Duncan parroted glibly: "don't smoke, drink, swear, and
on Sundays I go to church."

The bland smile with which he faced Lockwood's keen scrutiny disarmed
suspicion.

"I'm glad to hear that," Blinky told him. "I'm at the head of the
temp'rance movement here, and I hope you'll join us, and set an example
to our fast young men."

"I feel sure I could do that," said Duncan meekly.

Lockwood removed his hat, exposing the cranium of a bald-headed eagle,
and fanned himself. "Warm to-day," he observed in an endeavour to be
genial that all but sprained his temperament.

Indeed, so great was the strain that he winked violently.

Duncan observed this phenomenon with natural astonishment not unmixed
with awe. "Yes, sir, very," he agreed, wondering what it might portend.

"I believe I'll have a glass of sody."

"Certainly." Duncan, by now habituated to the formulae of soda
dispensing, promptly produced a bright and shining glass.

"I see you've been fixin' this place up some."

"Oh, yes," said Nat loftily. "We expect to have the best drugstore in
the State. We're getting in new stock to-day, and naturally things are
a little out of order, but we'll straighten up without delay. We'll try
to deserve your esteemed patronage," he concluded doubtfully, with a
hazy impression that such a speech would be considered appropriate
under the circumstances.

"You shall have it, Mr. Duncan, you shall have it!"

"Thank you, I'm sure.... What syrup would you prefer?"

"Just sody," stipulated Lockwood.

His spasmodic wink again smote Duncan's understanding a mighty blow.
Unable to believe his eyes, he hedged and stammered. Could it be--?
This from the leader of the temperance movement in Radville?


"I beg pardon----?"

His denseness irritated Blinky slightly, with the result that the right
side of his face again underwent an alarming convulsion. "I say," he
explained carefully, "just--_plain_--sody."

"On the level?"

"What?" grunted Blinky; and blinked again.

A smile of comprehension irradiated Nat's features. "Pardon," he said,
"I'm a little new to the business."

Blinky, fanning himself industriously, glared round the store while
Duncan, turning his back, discreetly found and uncorked the whiskey
bottle. He was still a trifle dubious about the transaction, but on the
sound principles of doing all things thoroughly, poured out a liberal
dose of raw, red liquor. Then, with his fingers clamped tightly about
the bottom of the glass, the better to conceal its contents from any
casual but inquisitive passer-by, he quickly filled it with soda and
placed it before Blinky, accompanying the action with the sweetest of
childlike smiles.

Lockwood, nodding his acknowledgments, lifted the glass to his lips.
Duncan awaited developments with some apprehension. To his relief,
however, Blinky, after an experimental swallow, emptied the mixture
expeditiously into his system; and smacked his thin lips resoundingly.

"How," he demanded, "can anyone want intoxicatin' likers when
they can get such a bracin' drink as that?"

"I pass," Nat breathed, limp with admiration of such astounding
hypocrisy.

Blinky reluctantly pried a nickel loose from his finances and placed it
on the counter. Duncan regarded it with disdain.

"Ten cents more, please," he suggested tactfully.

"What for?"

"Plain sody." The explanation was accompanied by a very passable
imitation of Blinky's blink.

Happily for Duncan, Blinky has no sense of humour: if he had he would
explode the very first time he indulged in introspection.

"Not much," said he with his sour smile. "I guess you're jokin'....
Well, good luck to you, Mr. Duncan. I'd like to have you come round and
see us some evenin'."

"Thank you very much, sir." Duncan accompanied Blinky to the door.
"I've already had the pleasure of meeting your daughter, sir. She's a
charming girl."

"I'm real glad you think so," said Blinky, intensely gratified. "She
seems to've taken a great shine to you, too. Come round and get
'quainted with the hull family. You're the sort of young feller I'd
like her to know." He paused and looked Nat up and down captiously,
as one might appraise the points of a horse of quality put up for sale.
"Good-day," said he, with the most significant of winks.

"Oh, that's all right," Nat hastened to reassure him. "I won't say a
word about it."

Blinky, on the point of leaving, started to question this (to him)
cryptic utterance, but luckily had the current of his thoughts diverted
by the entrance of Roland Barnette, in company with his friend Mr.
Burnham.

Roland's consternation at this unexpected encounter was, in the mildest
term, extreme. At sight of his employer he pulled up as if slapped.
"Oh!" he faltered, "I didn't know you was here, sir."

"No," said Blinky with keen relish, "I guess you didn't."

"I--ah--come over to see Sam about that note," stammered Roland.

"Wal, don't you bother your head 'bout what ain't your business, Roly.
Come on back to the bank."

"All right, sir." Roland grasped frantically at the opportunity to
emphasise his importance. "Excuse me, Mr. Lockwood, but I'd like to
interdoos you to a friend of mine, Mr. Burnham from Noo York."

Amused, Burnham stepped into the breach. "How are you?" he said with
the proper nuance of cordiality, offering his hand.

Lockwood shook it unemotionally. "How de do?" he said, perfunctory.

"I brought Mr. Burnham in to see Sam----"

"Yes," Burnham interrupted Roland quickly; "Barnette's been kind enough
to show me round town a bit."

"Here on business?" inquired Lockwood pointedly.

"No, not exactly," returned Burnham with practised ease, "just looking
round."

"Only lookin', eh?" Blinky's countenance underwent one of its erratic
quakes as he examined Burnham with his habitual intentness.

The New Yorker caught the wink and lost breath. "Ah--yes--that's all,"
he assented uneasily. And as he spoke another wink dumbfounded him.
"Why?" he asked, with a distinct loss of assurance. "Don't you believe
it."

"Don't see no reason why I shouldn't," grunted Blinky. "Hope you'll
like what you see. Good day."

"So long ... Mr. Lockwood," returned Burnham uncertainly.

Lockwood paused outside the door. "Come 'long, Roland."

"Yes, sir; right away; just a minute." Roland was lingering
unwillingly, detained by Burnham's imperative hand. "What d'you want? I
got to hurry."

"What was he winking at me for?" demanded Burnham heatedly. "Have
you----?"

"Oh!" Roland laughed. "He wasn't winking. He can't help doing that.
It's a twitchin' he's got in his eye. That's why they call him Blinky."

"Oh, that was it!" Burnham accepted the explanation with distinct
relief, while Duncan, who had been an unregarded spectator, suddenly
found cause to retire behind one of the show-cases on important
business.

So that was the explanation!...

After his paroxysm had subsided and he felt able to control his facial
muscles, Duncan emerged, suave and solemn. Roland had disappeared with
Blinky, and Burnham was alone.

"Anything you wish, sir?" asked Nat.

"Only to see Mr. Graham."

"He's out just at present, but I think he'll be back in a moment or so.
Will you wait? You'll find that chair comfortable, I think."

"Believe I will," said Burnham with an air. He seated himself. "I can't
wait long, though," he amended.

"Yes, sir. And if you'll excuse me----?"

Burnham's hand dismissed him with a tolerant wave. "Go right on about
your business," he said with supreme condescension.

And Duncan returned to his work in the backyard. It wasn't long before
he found occasion to go back to the store, and by that time old Sam was
there in conversation with Burnham. Neither noticed Nat as he entered,
and to begin with he paid them little heed, being occupied with his
task of depositing an armful of bottles without mishap and then placing
them on the shelves. The hum of their voices from the other side of the
counter struck an indifferent ear while he busied himself, but
presently a word or phrase caught his interest, and he found himself
listening, at first casually, then with waxing attention.

"That's part of my business," he heard Burnham say in his sleek,
oleaginous accents. "Sometimes I pick up an odd no-'count contraption
that makes me a bit of money, and more times I'm stung and lose on it.
It's all a gamble, of course, and I'm that way--like to take a gambling
chance on anything that strikes my fancy--like that burner of yours."

"Yes," Graham returned: "the gas arrangement."

"It's a curious idea--quite different from the one I told you about;
but I kinda took to it. There might be something to it, and again there
mightn't. I've been thinking I might be willing to risk a few dollars
on it, if we could come to terms."

"Do you mean it, really?" said old Sam eagerly.

"Not to invest in it, so to speak; I don't think it's chances are
strong enough for that. But if you'd care to sell the patent outright
and aren't too ambitious, we might make a dicker. What d'you say?"

"Why, yes," said Graham, quivering with anticipation. "Yes, indeed,
if--"

"Well?"

"If you really think it's worth anything, sir."

"Well, as I say, there's no telling; but I was thinking about it at
dinner, and I sort of concluded I'd like to own that burner, so I made
out a little bill of sale, and I says to myself, says I: 'If Graham
will take five hundred dollars for that patent, I'll give him spot
cash, right in his hand,' says I."

With this Burnham tipped back in his chair, and brought forth a wallet
from which he drew a sheet of paper and several bills.

"Five hundred dollars!" repeated Graham, thunderstruck by this
munificence.

"Yes, sir: five hundred, cash! To tell you the truth--guess you don't
know it--I heard at the bank that they didn't intend to extend the time
on that note of yours, and I thought this five hundred would come in
handy, and kind of wanted to help you out. Now what do you say?"

He flourished the bills under Graham's nose and waited, entirely at
ease as to his answer.

"Well," said the old man, "it is kind of you, sir--very kind. Everybody's
been good to me recently--or else I'm dreamin'."

"Then it's a bargain?"

"Why, I hope it won't lose any money for you, Mr. Burnham," Sam
hesitated, with his ineradicable sense of fairness and square-dealing.
"Making gas from crude oil ought to--"

Duncan never heard the end of that speech. For some moments he had been
listening intently, trying to recollect something. The name of Burnham
plucked a string on the instrument of his memory; he knew he had heard
it, some place, some time in the past; but how, or when, or in respect
to what he could not make up his mind. It had required Sam's reference
to gas and crude oil to close the circuit. Then he remembered: Kellogg
had mentioned a man by the name of Burnham who was "on the track of" an
important invention for making gas from crude oil. This must be the
man, Burnham, the tracker; and poor old Graham must be the tracked....

Without warning Duncan ran round and made himself an uninvited third to
the conference.

"Mr. Graham, one moment!" he begged, excited. "Is this patent of yours
on a process of making gas from crude oil?"

Burnham looked up impatiently, frowning at the interruption, but Graham
was all good humour.

"Why, yes," he started to explain; "it's that burner over there that--"

"But I wouldn't sell it just yet if I were you," said Nat. "It may be
worth a good deal--"

"Now look here!" Burnham got to his feet in anger. "What business 've
you got butting into this?" he demanded, putting himself between Duncan
and the inventor.

"Me?" Duncan queried simply. "Only just because I'm a business man. If
you don't believe it, ask Mr. Graham."

"He's got a perfect right to advise me, Mr. Burnham," interposed
Graham, rising.

"Well, but--but what objection 've you got to his making a little money
out of this patent?" Burnham blustered.

"None; only I want to look into the matter first. I think it might be--
ah--advisable."

"What makes you think so?" demanded Burnham, his tone withering.

"Well," said Nat, with an effort summoning his faculties to cope with a
matter of strict business, "it's this way: I've got an _idea_," he
said, poking at Burnham with the forefinger which had proven so
effective with Pete Willing, "that you wouldn't offer five hundred iron
men for this burner unless you expected to make something big out of
it, and... it ought to be worth just as much to Mr. Graham as to you."

"Ah, you don't know what you're talking about."

"I know that," Nat admitted simply, "but I do happen to know you're
promoting a scheme for making gas from crude oil, and if Mr. Graham
will listen to me you won't get his patent until I've consulted my
friend, Henry Kellogg."

"_Kellogg!_"

"Yes. You know--of L.J. Bartlett & Company." Nat's forefinger continued
to do deadly work. Burnham backed away from it as from a fiery brand.

"Oh, well!" he said, dashed, "if you're representing Kellogg"--and Nat
took care not to refute the implication--"I--I don't want to interfere.
Only," he pursued at random, in his discomfiture, "I can't see why he
sent you here."

"I'd be ashamed to tell you," Nat returned with an open smile. "Better
ask him."

Burnham gathered his wits together for a final threat. "That's what I
will do!" he threatened. "And I'll do it the minute I can see him. You
can bet on that, Mister What's-Your-Name!"

"No, I can't," said Nat naively. "I'm not allowed to gamble."

His ingenuous expression exasperated Burnham. The man lost control of
his temper at the same moment that he acknowledged to himself his
defeat. In disgust he turned away.

"Oh, there's no use talking to you--"

"That's right," Nat agreed fairly.

"But I'll see you again, Mr. Graham--"

"Not alone, if I can help it, Mr. Burnham," Duncan amended sweetly.

"But," Burnham continued, severely ignoring Nat and addressing himself
squarely to Graham, "you take my tip and don't do any business with
this fellow until you find out who he is." He flung himself out of the
shop with a barked: "Good-day!"

"Well, Mr. Graham?" Duncan turned a little apprehensively to the
inventor. But Sam's expression was almost one of beatific content. His
weak old lips were pursed, his eyes half-closed, his finger tips
joined, and he was rocking back and forth on his heels.

"Margaret used to talk that way, sometimes," he remarked. "She was the
best woman in the world--and the wisest. She used to take care of me
and protect me from my foolish impulses, just as you do, my boy...."

For a space Duncan kept silent, respecting the old man's memories, and
a great deal humbled in spirit by the parallel Sam had drawn. Then: "I
was afraid what I said would sound queer to you, sir," he ventured--
"that you mightn't understand that I'm not here to do you out of your
invention..."

"There's nothing on earth, my boy,"--Graham's hand fell on Nat's arm--
"could make me think that. But five hundred dollars, you see, would
have repaid you for taking up that note, and--and I could have bought
Betty a new dress for the party. But I'm sure you've done what's best.
You're a business man--"

"Don't!" Nat pleaded wildly. "I've been called that so much of late
that it's beginning to hurt!"




XIV


MOSTLY ABOUT BETTY

Sam Graham said to me, that night: "I don't know when so many things
have happened to me in so short a time. It don't seem hardly possible
it's only four days since that boy came in here asking for a job. It's
wonderful, simply wonderful, the change he's made."

He waved a comprehensive hand, and I, glancing round the transformed
store, agreed with him. Everything was spick and span and mighty
attractive--clean and neat-looking--with the new stock in the shining
cases and arranged on the glistening white shelves: not all of it set
out by any means, of course, but no unplaced goods in sight, cluttering
up the counters or kicking round the floor.

"The way he's worked----! You'd hardly believe it, Homer. He said he
wanted to get home early so's to write a letter to a friend of his in
New York, a Mr. Kellogg, junior member of L. J. Bartlett & Company,
about my invention. But he insisted on leaving everything to rights for
business to-morrow. And just look!"

"But I thought Roland Barnette----?" I suggested with guile. Of
course I'd heard a rumour of what had happened--'most everyone in town
had--and how Roland and his friend, Mr. Burnham, had sort of fallen out
on the way from the Bigelow House to the train; but no one knew
anything definite, and I wanted to get "the rights of it," as Radville
says.

So I had dropped in at Graham's, on my way home from the office, as I
often do, for an evening smoke and a bit of gossip: something I rarely
indulge in, but which I've found has a curious psychological effect on
the circulation of the _Citizen_--like a tonic. Sam was just at
the point of closing up. He was alone, Duncan having gone home about an
hour earlier, and Betty being upstairs, while (since it was quite
half-past nine) all the rest of Radville, with few exceptions (chiefly
to be noted at Schwartz's and round the Bigelow House bar) was making
its final rounds of the day: locking the front door, putting out the
lamp in its living-room, banking the fire in the range, ejecting the
cat from the kitchen and wiping out the sink, and finally, odoriferous
kerosene lamp in hand, climbing slowly to the stuffy upstairs
bed-chamber. Indeed, the lights of Radville begin to go out about
half-past eight; by ten, as a rule, the town is as lively as a
cemetery.

But I am by nature inexorable and merciless, a masterful man with such
as old Sam; and it was an hour later before I left him, drained of
the last detail of the day. He was a weary man, but a happy one, when
he bade me good-night, and I myself felt a little warmed by his
cheerfulness as I plodded up Main Street through the thick oppression
of darkness beneath the elms.

After a time I became aware that someone was overtaking me, and waited,
thinking at first it would be one of my people. But it wasn't long
before I recognised from the quick tempo of the approaching footfalls
that this was no Radvillian. There was just light enough--starlight
striking down through the thinner spaces in the interlacing foliage--to
make visible a moving shadow, and when it drew nearer I saluted it with
confidence.

"Good-evening, Mr. Duncan."

He stopped short, peering through the gloom. "Good-evening, but--Mr.
Littlejohn? Glad to see you." He joined me and we proceeded homeward,
he moderating his stride a trifle in deference to my age. "Aren't you
late?"

"A bit," I admitted. "I've been gossiping with Sam Graham."

"Oh...?"

"You're out late yourself, Mr. Duncan, for one of such regular, not to
say abnormal, habits."

He laughed lightly. "Had a letter I wanted to catch the first morning
train."

"Then you're interested in Sam's burner?"

"No, I'm not, but I hope to interest others....Oh, yes: Mr. Graham
told you about it, of course.... It just struck me that if a man of
Burnham's stamp was willing to risk five hundred dollars on the
proposition, he very likely foresaw a profit in it that might as well
be Mr. Graham's. So I've sent a detailed description of the thing to a
friend in New York, who'll look into it for me."

He was silent for a little.

"Who's Colonel Bohun?" he asked suddenly.

"Why do you ask?"

"I saw him this evening. He was passing the store and stopped to glare
in as if he hated it--stopped so long that I got nervous and asked Miss
Lockwood (she'd just happened in for a parting glass--of soda) whether
he was an anarchist or a retired burglar. She told me his name, but was
otherwise inhumanly reticent."

"For Josie?" I chuckled; but he didn't respond. So I took up the tale
of the first family of Radville.

"The story runs," said I, "that the Bohuns were one of the F.F.V.'s;
that they sickened of slavery, freed their slaves and moved North, to
settle in Radville. I _believe_ they came from somewhere round
Lynchburg; but that was a couple of generations ago. When the Civil War
broke out the old Colonel up there"--I gestured vaguely in the general
direction of the Bohun mansion--"couldn't keep out of it, and
naturally he couldn't fight with the North. He won his spurs under
Lee.... After the war had blown over he came home, to find that his
only son had enlisted with the Radville company and disappeared at
Gettysburg. It pretty nearly killed the old man--though he wasn't so
old then; but there's fire in the Bohun blood, and his boy's action
seemed to him nothing less than treason."

"And that's what soured him on the world?"

"Not altogether. He had a daughter--Margaret. She was the most
beautiful woman in the world...." I suspect my voice broke a little
just there, for there was a shade of respectful sympathy in the
monosyllable with which he filled the pause. "He swore she should never
marry a Northerner, but she did; I guess, being a Bohun, she had to,
after hearing she must not. There were two of us that loved her, but
she chose Sam Graham...."

"Why," he said awkwardly--"I'm sorry."

"I'm not: she was right, if I couldn't see it that way. They ran away--
and so did I. I went East, but they came back to Radville. Colonel
Bohun never forgave them, but they were very happy till she died.
Betty's their daughter, of course: Sam's not the kind that marries more
than once."

Duncan thought this over without comment until we reached our gate.
There he paused for a moment.

"He's got plenty of money, I presume--old Bohun?"

"So they say. Probably not much now, but a great deal more than he
needs."

"Then why doesn't somebody get after the old scoundrel and make him do
something for that poor--for Miss Graham?" he asked indignantly.

"He tried it once, but they wouldn't listen. His conditions were
impossible," I explained. "She was to renounce her father and take the
name of Bohun------."

"What rot!" Duncan growled. "What an old fiend he must be! Of course he
knew she'd refuse."

"I suspect he did."

Duncan hesitated a bit longer. "Anyhow," he said suddenly, "somebody
ought to get after him and make him see the thing the right way."

"S'pose you try it, Mr. Duncan?" I suggested maliciously, as we went up
the walk.

He stopped at the door. "Perhaps I shall," he said slowly.

"I'd advise you not to. The last man that tried it has no desire to
repeat the experiment."

"Who was he?"

"An old fool named Homer Littlejohn."

Duncan put out his hand. "Shake!" he insisted. "We'll talk this over
another time."

We went in very quietly, lit our candles, and with elaborate care
avoided the home-made burglar-alarm (a complicated arrangement of
strings and tinpans on the staircase, which Miss Carpenter insists on
maintaining ever since Roland Barnette missed a dollar bill and
insisted his pocket had been picked on Main Street) and so mounted to
our rooms. As we were entering (our doors adjoin) a thought delayed my
good-night.

"By the way, did you get your invitation to Josie Lockwood's party, Mr.
Duncan? I happened to see it on the hall table this evening."

"Yes," he assented quietly.

"It's to be the social event of the year. I hope you'll enjoy it."

"I'm not going."

"Not going!... Why not?"

"It's against the rules at first--I mean, business rules. I'll be so
busy at the store, you know."

"Josie'll be disappointed."

"Thank you," said he gratefully. "Good-night."

Alone, I was fain to confess he baffled my understanding.

The rush of business to Graham's began the following morning: Duncan's
hands were full almost from the first, and he had to relegate such
matters as making final disposition of his stock and getting acquainted
with it to the intervals between waiting upon customers. Old Sam must
have put up more prescriptions in the next few days than he had within
the last five years. Everybody wanted to take a look at the renovated
store, shake Sam's hand, and see what the new partner was really like.
Sothern and Lee's was for some days quite deserted, especially after
Duncan took a leaf out of their book, bought an ice-cream freezer and
began to serve dabs of cream in the sody. I've always maintained that
our Radville folks are pretty thoroughly sot in their ways (the phrase
is local), but the way they flocked to Graham's forced me to amend the
aphorism with the clause: "except when their curiosity is aroused."
Every woman in town wanted to know what Graham and Duncan carried that
Sothern and Lee didn't, and how much cheaper they were than the more
established concern; also they wanted to know Mr. Duncan. I suspect no
drug-store ever had so many inquiries for articles that it didn't
carry, but might possibly, or ought to, in the estimation of the
prospective purchasers, as well as that at no time had Radvillians
happened to think of so many things that they could get at a
druggist's. People drove in from as far as twenty miles away, as soon
as the news reached them, to buy notepaper and stamps--people who
didn't write or receive a letter a month. Will Bigelow, even, dropped
round and bought samples of the tobacco stock, from two-fors up to
ten-centers--and smoked them with expressive snorts. Tracey Tanner's
soda and cigarette trade was transferred bodily to Graham's from the
first, and Roland Barnette gave it his patronage, albeit grudgingly, as
soon as he found it impossible to shake Josie Lockwood's allegiance. I
say grudgingly, because Roland didn't like the new partner, and had
said so from the first. But everyone else did like him, almost without
exception. His attentiveness and courtesy were not ungrateful after the
way things were thrown at you at Sothern and Lee's, we declared.

Duncan certainly did strive to please. No man ever worked harder in a
Radville store than he did. And from the time that he began to believe
there would be some reward for his exertions, that the business was
susceptible to being built up by the employment of progressive methods,
he grew astonishingly prolific of ideas, from our sleepy point of view.
The window displays were changed almost daily, to begin with, and were
made as interesting as possible; we learned to go blocks out of our way
to find out what Graham and Duncan were exploiting to-day. And daily
bargain sales were instituted--low-priced articles of everyday use,
such as shaving soap, tooth brushes, and the like, being sold at a
few cents above cost on certain days which were announced in advance by
means of hand-lettered cards in the show-windows; whereas formerly we
had always been obliged to pay full list-prices. An axiom of his creed
as it developed was to the effect that stock must not be allowed to
stand idle upon the shelves; if there were no call for a certain line
of articles, it must be stimulated. I remember that, some time along in
August, he began to worry about the inactivity in cough-syrups.

"No one wants cough-syrups in summer," he told Graham; "that stuff's
been here six weeks and more. It's getting out of training. Needs
exercise. Look at this bottle: it says: 'Shake well.' Now it hasn't
been shaken at all since it was put on the shelves, and I haven't got
time to shake it every morning. We must either hire a boy to give it
regular exercise, or sell it off and get in a fresh supply for the
winter. I'll have to think up some scheme to make 'em take it off our
hands."

He did. Somehow or other he managed to convince us that forewarned was
forearmed, that it was better to have a bottle or two of cough-syrup in
our medicine chests at home than on the shelves of the drug-store, when
the chill autumnal winds began to blow, especially when you could buy
it now for thirty-nine cents, whereas it would be fifty-four in
October.

Still earlier in his career as a business man he noticed that the local
practitioners wrote their prescriptions on odd scraps of paper.

"That's all wrong," he declared. "We'll have to fix it." And by next
morning the job-printing press back of the Court House was groaning
under an order from Graham and Duncan's, and a few days later every
physician within several miles of Radville received half a dozen neat
pads of blanks with his name and address printed at the top and the
advice across the bottom: "Go to Graham's for the best and purest drugs
and chemicals." The backs of the blanks were utilised to request people
living out of reach, but on rural free delivery routes, either to mail
their prescriptions and other orders in, or have the physicians
telephone them, promising to fill and despatch them by the first post.

For he had a telephone installed within the first fortnight, and the
next day advertised in the _Gazette_ that orders by telephone
would receive prompt attention and be delivered without delay. Tracey
Tanner became his delivery-boy, deserting his father's stables for the
obvious advantages of three dollars a week with a chance to learn the
business.... Sothern and Lee were quick to recognise the advantage the
telephone gave Graham and Duncan, and promptly had one put in their
store; but the delay had proven almost fatal: Radville had already
got into the habit of telephoning to Graham's for a cake of soap, or
whatnot, and it's hard to break a Radville habit.

As business increased and the stock turned itself over at a profit,
Duncan began to branch out, to make improvements and introduce new
lines of goods. He it was who inoculated Radville with the habit of
buying manufactured candies. Up to the time of his advent, we had been
accustomed to and content with home-made taffies and fudges--and were,
I've no doubt, vastly better off on that account. But Duncan, starting
with a line of five- and ten-cent packages of indigestible sweets, in
time made arrangements with a big Pittsburgh confectionery concern to
ship him a small consignment of pound and half-pound "fancy" boxes of
chocolates and bonbons twice a week. And taffy-pulls and fudge parties
lapsed into desuetude.

Later, Sperry introduced him to an association of druggists, of which
he became a member, for the maintenance and exploitation of the cigar
and tobacco trade in connection with the drug business. They installed
at Graham's a handsome show-case and fixtures especially for the sale
and display of cigars, and thereafter it was possible to purchase
smokable tobacco in our town.

Again, he treated Radville to its first circulating library,
establishing a branch in the store. One could buy a book at a moderate
price, and either keep it or exchange it for a fee of a few cents. I
disputed the wisdom of this move, alleging, and with reason, that
Radville didn't read modern fiction to any extent. But Duncan argued
that it didn't matter. "They're going to try it on as a novelty, to
begin with," he said, "and it'll bring 'em into the store for a few
exchanges, at least. That's all I want. Once we get 'em in here, it'll
be hard if we can't sell them something else. You'll see."

He was right.

Undoubtedly he made the business hum during those first few months; and
after that it settled down to a steady forward movement. The store
became a social centre, a place for people to meet. In time Tracey was
promoted to be assistant and another boy engaged to make deliveries.
... And Duncan had never been happier; he had found something he could
understand and, understanding, accomplish; there was work for his hands
to do, and they had discovered they could do it successfully. I don't
believe he stopped to think about it very much, but he was conscious of
that glow of achievement, that heightening of the spirits, that comes
with the knowledge of success, be that success however insignificant,
and it benefited him enormously....

But this chronicle of progress has run away altogether with a desultory
pen, which started to tell why Duncan didn't want to go to Josie
Lockwood's party. I was long in finding out, but not so long as Duncan
himself, perhaps; by which I mean to say that he was conscious of the
desire not to go, and determined not to, without stopping to analyse
the cause of that desire more than very superficially.

It happened, toward the close of the eventful day already detailed at
such length, that as Duncan was entering the house with a load of boxed
goods, he heard voices in the store--young voices, of which one was
already too familiar to his ears. He paused, waiting for them to get
through with their business and go; for he had no time to waste just
then, even upon the heiress of his manufactured destiny. Betty was
keeping shop at the time (old Sam having gone upstairs for a little
rest, who was overwrought and weary with the excitement of that day)
and it was Duncan's hope that she would be able to serve the customers
without his assistance.

There were two of them, you see--Josie and Angle Tuthill--hunting as
usual in couples; and while he waited, not meaning to eavesdrop but
unwilling to betray his whereabouts by moving, he heard very clearly
their passage with Betty.

He overheard first, distinctly, Betty responding in expressionless
voice: "Hello, Angie.... Hello, Josie."

There ensued what seemed a slightly awkward pause. Then Josie,
painfully sweet: "Did you get the invitation, Betty?"

Betty moved into Duncan's range of vision, apparently intending to come
and call him. She turned at the question, and he saw her small, thin
little body and pinched face _en silhouette_ against the fading
light beyond. He saw, too, that she was stiffening herself as if for
some unequal contest.

"The invitation?" she questioned dully, but with her head up and
steady.

"Why," said Josie, "I sent you one. To the party, you know--my lawn
feet next week."

I give the local pronunciation as it is.

"Did you?"

"I gave it to Tracey for you," persisted the tormentor. "Didn't you get
it?"

Betty caught at her breath, inaudibly; only Duncan could see the little
spasm of mortification and anger that shook her.

"Oh, perhaps I did," she said shortly. "I--I'll ask Mr. Duncan to wait
on you."

She swung quickly out into the hallway, slamming the door behind her
and so darkening it that she didn't detect Duncan's shadowed figure.
And if she had meant to call him, she must have forgotten it; for an
instant later he heard her stumbling up the stairs, and as she
disappeared he caught the echo of a smothered sob.

He waited, motionless, too disturbed at the time to care to enter the
store and endure Josie's vapid advances; and through the thin partition
there came to him their comments on Betty's ungracious behaviour.

"Well!... _did_ you ever!"

That was Angle; Josie chimed in the same key: "Oh, what did you expect
from that kind of a girl?"

"_Ssh!_ maybe he's coming!"

After a moment's silence, Josie: "Oh, come on. Don't let's wait any
longer. I don't think it's healthy to drink sody so soon before dinner,
anyway."

"And, besides, we only wanted to hear--"

Their voices with their footsteps diminished. Duncan allowed a prudent
interval to elapse, entered the store and began to bestow the goods he
had brought in.

While he was at work the light failed. He stopped for lack of it just
as Betty came downstairs.

"Hello!" he said cheerfully. "Know where the matches are?"

"Yes." She moved behind a counter and fetched him a few. "Are you 'most
done?" she inquired, not unfriendly, as he took down from its bracket
one of the oil lamps.

"Hardly," he responded, touching a light to the wick and replacing the
chimney. "It's a good deal of a job."

"Yes..."

He replaced the lamp, and in the act of turning toward another caught a
glimpse of the girl's face, pale and drawn, her eyes a trifle reddened.
And with that commonsense departed from him, leaving him wholly a prey
to his impulse of pity. "Oh, thunder!" he told himself, thrusting a
hand into his pocket. "I might as well be broke as the way I am now."
He produced the scanty remains of his "grubstake."

"Miss Graham..."

"Yes?" she asked, wondering.

"Could you get a party dress for thirty-four dollars?"

"Thirty-four dollars!" she faltered.

He discovered what small change he had in his pocket: it was like him
to be extravagant, even extreme. "And fifty-three cents?" he pursued,
with a nervous laugh.

"Heavens!" the girl gasped. "I should think so!"

"Then go ahead!" He offered her the money, but she could only stare,
incredulous. "I'll stake you."

"Oh..._no_, Mr. Duncan," she managed to say.

"Oh, yes!" He tried to catch one of the hands that involuntarily had
risen toward her face in a gesture of wonder. "Please do," he begged,
his tone persuasive, "as a favour to me."

But she evaded him, stepping back. "I couldn't take it; I couldn't
really."

"Yes, you can. Just try it once, and see how easy it is," he persisted,
pursuing.

"No, I can't." She looked up shyly and shook her head, that smile of
her mother's for the moment illuminating her face almost with the
radiance of beauty. "But I--I thank you very much--just the same."

"But I want you to go to that party..."

"You're awful' kind," she said softly, still smiling, "but I don't care
to go, now. I--"

"Don't care to! Why, you were insisting on going, a little while ago."

"Yes," she admitted simply, "I know I was. But ... I've been thinking
over what you said, since then, and I ... I've made up my mind I'd be
out of place there."

"Out of place!" he echoed, thunderstruck.

"Yes. I've concluded I belong here in the store with father." She half
turned away. "And I guess folks is better off if they stay where they
belong...."


She went slowly from the room, and he remained staring, stupefied.

"You never can tell about a woman," he concluded with all the gravity
of an original philosopher.




XV


MANOEUVRES OF JOSIE

Nat didn't go to the Lockwood lawn fete, and did excuse himself on the
plea of being unable to leave the store. I'm afraid the young man had a
faint, fond hope that Josie would be offended; but his excuse was
accepted without remonstrance. And, indeed, it was at that time quite a
reasonable one. Tracey had not been added to the staff, although
business was booming, and Saturday night is, as everyone who has lived
in a Radville knows, the busiest of the week; all the stores keep open
late on Saturday--some as late as eleven--and frequently take in half
the week's income between noon and the closing hour. Duncan really
couldn't be spared; so it's probable that Josie cloaked her
disappointment and comforted herself with the assurance that her
selection of the day had been an error in judgment, of which she would
not again be guilty.

But the party came off, without fail, and that on a wonderful, still,
moonlit night; and everybody voted it a splendid success. The
_Citizen_ in its next issue recorded the event to the extent of a
column and a half of reading matter, called it a social function, and
described the gowns of the leading ladies of society present in
bewildering phrases. I was not invited, but the owner of the paper was,
and his wife wrote the description with the assistance of the entire
editorial and reportorial force, a dictionary and some evil if
suppressed language from the foreman of the composing-room. I read
the proofs with an admiration strongly tinctured with awe, and found
it lacking in one particular only: no mention was made of Roland
Barnette's first open-faced suit.

Roland had ordered it from a clothing-house in Chicago, and it arrived
just in time. Having heard all about it from Roland's own lips (they
dilated upon the matter to Watty the tailor, just beneath my window), I
sort of hung round downtown Saturday evening in the hope of catching
a glimpse of it, and was not disappointed. I was loitering in Graham's
when Roland sauntered nonchalantly in at about a quarter to eight and
called for a pack of "Sweets." Sam served him, and Duncan, happily for
him disengaged at the moment, after one look at Roland retired
precipitately behind the prescription counter--overcome, I judged from
Roland's triumphant smirk, by deepest chagrin. Well, thought I, might
he have been: he could never, by whatever wildest endeavour, have
approximated Roland's splendour.

The coat was bob-tailed (at least, so Watty described it within my
hearing) and curiously double-breasted, caught together at the waist
with a single button, thus revealing a shining expanse of very stiff
shirt-bosom; which creaked, for some reason. With this Roland wore a
ribbed white-silk waistcoat, very brilliant low-cut patent leather
shoes, and white-silk socks. The trousers were strikingly cut, as to
each leg, after the physical configuration of the domestic pear, and
the effect of the whole was measurably enhanced by an opera-hat--one
of those tall and striking contraptions that you can shut up by
pressing gently but firmly upon the human midriff and looking
unconscious, but which is apt to open with a resounding report if
you're not careful... I am glad to be able to report that Roland failed
to commit the solecism of wearing a red string tie; his tie was a
sober black, firmly knotted at the factory. I'm glad too, for the
sartorial honour of Radville, that Roland knew how to wear such
fixin's: that is to say, with an expression of proud defiance.

After he had departed, stepping high, Sam called me behind the counter
to assist in reviving Duncan. We found him leaning upon the counter,
his forehead resting upon a mortar, very red in the face and breathing
stertorously; and when Sam addressed him, to learn what was the matter,
he seemed unable to speak, but choked and beat the air feebly with his
hands. Sam concluded he had swallowed something, and was, I think,
right; he was plainly half strangled, and only recovered after we had
beaten his back severely. Then he refused any explanation, beyond
saying that he was subject to such seizures.

After the party the town's excitement simmered down and subsided; we
had become moderately accustomed to the presence of Duncan in our midst
(strange as this may sound), and for some time nothing happened germane
to the fate of the Fortune Hunter.

On his part, he fell into a routine without the least evidence of
discontent. He was early to rise and early to work, and rarely left the
store save at meal hours and closing-up time. And in the course of our
serene days, I began to notice in him an increasing interest in the
affairs of the church; he seemed to look forward with a not uneager
anticipation to the fixtures of its calendar. He attended with
admirable regularity both morning and evening services, on Sunday, the
mid-weekly prayer-meeting, and Friday evening choir practice. For in
the course of time he had been won over to join the choir, and modestly
discovered to our edification a barytone voice, wholly untrained but
not unpleasing. Mrs. Rogers, our organist, averred his superiority to
Packy Soule, whom he superseded, and was supported in this estimate by
the remainder of the choir, with the exception of Roland Barnette,
who helped with his reedy tenor. Josie Lockwood sang contralto and Bess
Gabriel what we were informed was soprano--only Radville called it a
treble. Tracey Tanner pumped the organ and puffed audibly in the
pauses--a singular testimony to his devotion to Angie Tuthill, who
"just sang" with the others, chiefly because she was Josie's nearest
friend.

I remember that, one Sunday night after evening service, Duncan
confided to me, quite seriously, "that the church thing was getting to
him." He seemed somewhat surprised, to a degree indignant, as if he
suspected religion of having taken an advantage of him in some
roundabout, underhand way.... He wondered audibly what Harry would
think if he could see him now.

He had settled down to a pretty steady correspondence with Kellogg,
chiefly on business matters. Kellogg was investigating old Sam's
burner, and seemed quite impressed with its possibilities. He had
quarrelled with Roland's friend, Burnham, on Duncan's representations,
and ordered him out of the offices of L. J. Bartlett & Company, it
seemed. Later he opened up negotiations with a corporation known as the
Modern Gas Company, I believe, a competitor of Consolidated Petroleum,
and in due course representatives of both concerns came to Radville,
examined the burner, and retired, non-committal. Then Bartlett sent
a requisition for a model, and supplied the funds for making it--thus
demonstrating his confidence. Sam never had such a good time in his
life as when occupied with that model, and in his elation was inspired
to invent two notable improvements on the machine--which were promptly
patented. Then the model was despatched, receipt acknowledged, and
nothing ensued for three or four months. Radville, which had been
watching and wondering with open incredulity and dissatisfaction (this
latter because neither Graham nor Duncan would talk about the matter),
concluded that the whole business had gone up in smoke, said "I told ye
so," and forgot it completely. Roland Barnette, I believe, drove the
last nail in the coffin of our expectations that anything would ever
come of it, by writing to Burnham that Duncan's negotiations had
failed, and inviting him to renew his offer if he thought it worth
while. Presumably he didn't, for Roland received no reply, and told the
town so....

I don't remember just how soon it was, but it was shortly after the
formation of the firm of Graham and Duncan that the young man received
his first invitation to dinner at the Lockwoods'. He accepted, of
course, whether he wanted to or not, for there could be no excuse for
his refusing a Sunday bid, and the Lockwoods made quite an event of
it. The Soules were invited, because they were Araminta Lockwood's
brother and sister-in-law, and the Godfreys came over from Westerly to
grace the board as representatives of the Lockwood strain. Also Ben
Lockwood attended--Blinky's first cousin and senior.

Duncan described the function in a letter to Kellogg as the time of his
young life. Undoubtedly it was in certain respects singular in his
experience. The entire party walked home from church through a hot
August noon, with that air of chastened joy common to a gathering of
relations--an atmosphere of festive gloom and funeral baked meats
painfully enlivened by exhilarating jests from old Ben, who was a
connoisseur of vintages when it came to jokes. Duncan wished
fervently, first that he might expire; secondly, and with greater
intensity of feeling, that they all might die. Minta Lockwood, he felt,
was slowly but expertly greasing him with adulation--as a python
prepares its prey before dining (or is it a python?)--and he knew he
was presently to be swallowed alive.

They dined protractedly. The meal, consisting of baked chicken, mashed
potatoes, boiled onions with cream sauce, boiled beets and green corn,
followed by rhubarb pie and ice cream, was served by an independent,
bony and red-faced specimen of the "help" genus. The atmosphere was
stifling, with the heat of the day thickened by the steam and odour of
cooked food. Duncan was seated consciously beside Josie--a circumstance
of which, in fact, everyone else seemed tolerantly aware. He writhed in
impotent agony, confronted alone by the consciousness he had brought
this thing upon himself: it was a part of his punishment.

At the conclusion of the meal, which endured throughout two
interminable hours, the elder menfolk withdrew to the garden and the
lawn, where they strolled about, sleepy eyes glistening with repletion,
until finally they disappeared, to each his doze. The ladies
foregathered in the parlour, conversing in undertones, with significant
glances and liftings of their eyebrows. Nat was left to Josie, who
conducted him to the side porch, out of sight of everybody, and planted
herself in the baggy hammock there. She was gay, even brilliant within
her limitations, arch, naive, coquettish, shy, petulant, by turns:
animated by a sense of conquest. She supplied the major part of the
conversation, chatting volubly on the thousand subjects she didn't
understand, the dozen she did. In the most ingenuous manner imaginable
she laid herself open to advances, not once, but a score of times; and
when he failed to respond according to the code of Radville, had the
wit to mask her chagrin, did she feel any: very probably she laid his
lack of responsiveness at the door of his shyness (a quality he was
wholly without) and liked him the better for it.

It was on this day that she extracted from him his promise to join the
choir; he acceded through apathy alone.

"I don't care whether you can sing or not," she confessed, with a look.
"But I do want somebody to walk home with me that ... I like."

"That's a nice way of putting it," Duncan considered without emphasis.

"Roland Barnette's always walked home with me, but I think he's just
tiresome."

"Why?" inquired the young man, with some interest.

She averted her head, plucking at the strands of the hammock. "Oh,
_you_ know," she said diffidently.

"Oh?" Nat was enlightened. "Then I'm sorry for Roland."

"Why?"

"I can't blame him, you know." He couldn't help this: the time, the
place, the girl inspired, indeed incited, one to banality.

"Why?" she persisted.

"Oh, _you_ know." He caught the intonation of her previous words
precisely.

She had the grace to blush and hang her head; but he received a
thrilling sidelong glance.

"Ah... aren't you awful to talk that way, Mr. Duncan?"

"Yes," he admitted meekly.

"Then you will join the choir?" she pursued, failing to fathom the
meaning of that humble acquiescence. Any other boy or man of her
acquaintance would have taken her remark as openly provocative.

"Oh, yes," he agreed listlessly.

"I'm so glad..."

He thanked her, but avoided her eye.

"We might's well begin to-night," she suggested presently, with
diffident, downcast eyes.

"What--the choir?" He was startled. "Oh, I couldn't without a
rehearsal--"

"No, I didn't mean that..."

"No?"

"I mean about Roland." She was paying minute attention to the lace
insertion of her skirt. From this circumstance he divined that he was
on dangerous ground, but could not, in his stupidity, understand just
what made it dangerous.

"About Roland--?"

"Yes; I mean... You know what I mean, Mr. Duncan?"

"I assure you I do not, Miss Lockwood."

"About not walking home with him any more. I don't want to. I wish
you'd commence to-night, instead of choir practice night. I'd much
rather walk home with you."

"After evening service, you mean?" She nodded. "It'll be a great
pleasure."

"Really?" She gave him her eyes now.

"Really," he assured her.

"Ah, I don't believe you mean that!"

"But indeed I do...."

It was not until nearly five o'clock that he was given a chance to
escape. He had, even then, to refuse inflexibly an invitation to stay
to supper.

Minta Lockwood--an expansive woman, generously convex--almost
smothered him with appreciation of his thanks. She held his hand in a
large, moist palm and beamed upon him, saying: "Now't you know the way,
Mr. Duncan...."

"Yes," Blinky insisted, blinking roguishly, "drop in any time. Take pot
luck. We're plain people, Mr. Duncan, but allus glad to see our
friends. Drop in any time."

Josie accompanied him to the front gate, where etiquette required him
to linger for a parting chat....

"Good-bye." The girl gave him her hand. "I'm real glad you came--at
last."

"The pleasure has been all mine," insisted the gallant bromide, fishing
the trite phrase desperately from the grey vacuity of his thoughts.
"You won't forget?"

"Forget what?"

"About to-night?"

"Do you imagine I could?..."

Josie returned to the family conclave, to interrupt a symposium on
Duncan's qualities. He was unanimously approved, on every point. She
took no part in the conversation, but listened, aglow with the pride of
triumph, until old Ben chose to observe:

"He seems to've taken a right smart set for Josie."

Then she rose, blushing, and tossed her pretty, pert head. "How you all
do talk!" she cried. "I'm not thinking about Mr. Duncan that way." And
she left the gathering.

"You might's well begin now as later," pursued her, accompanied by
chucklings; and she tossed her head, but wasn't at all displeased, be
sure.

Duncan wrote to Kellogg in his room that night after church: "I don't
want to sound immodest, but it looks as if you were right, old man:
apparently there's nothing to it...

"Probably I should have stayed on for supper, but I couldn't; I should
have choked. As it was, my soul was curdling. Another ten minutes and I
should have jumped down on the lawn and run round the house on all
fours, yapping and foaming at the mouth, and have wound up by
biting old Blinky..

"The worst of it all is, I know I'm ungrateful: I know they mean well.
But why is it that people who mean well almost invariably grate upon
your sensibilities like the screeching of a slate-pencil?

"In this case, I suspect it's a case of when Snob meets Snob. A snob, I
take it, is a fellow who holds himself your superior because he looks
at things in a different way. That counts me a snob in my mental
attitude toward the Lockwoods. I don't understand their conception of
life--wasn't brought up to understand it. And yet I know they're not a
bad sort, though they bore me to death what time I'm not laughing in my
sleeve at them. Blinky, for instance, is an old screw, but he can't
help that; he was born that way; and aside from the fact that money has
made him snobbish toward his neighbours, he's a simple, honest,
square-dealing (according to his lights) old Jasper. He's not snobbish
toward me, because I've got something he admires but can't understand
and never can acquire; but he's a snob of the first water when it comes
to somebody like this old prince I'm working for--Graham--and his
daughter. And so is Josie....

"But I mustn't say mean things about my future spouse, I presume....
That is the great trouble with your infernal scheme, Harry: it seems
to be working like a charm, and now that I've got something to do I'm
not so strong for it as I was. But I gave you my word. ... Only, mind
this: if the rules prescribe a perpetual course of Sunday dinners,
_en famille_, it's going to break down and turn out a natural-born
flivver. There are limits to human endurance, and I'm human, whatever
else I am not...."




XVI


WHERE RADVILLE FEARED TO TREAD

Summer slumbered to its close, a drowsy autumn settled upon our valley,
in which its traditional peace seemed but the more profound. The skies
darkened to an ineffable intensity of blue; the livery of the fields
was changed, green giving place to gold; the woodlands and lower slopes
of our hills flamed with the scarlet of dying sumach, with the russet
and orange and crimson of a foliage making merry against its moribund
to-morrows; a drought parched the land, and our little river lessened
to a mere trickle of water. The daylight hours became sensibly
abbreviated; while they endured they were golden and warm and hazy:
faint veils of purple shrouded the distances. Twilight fell early, its
air sweet with the tang of dead leaves raked into heaping bonfires by
the children of the town. The nights were long and cool, with a hint of
frosts to come. Day dissolved into day almost imperceptibly. ...

Josie Lockwood announced that she was going away to school in New York
for the winter. Pete Willing took the pledge and kept it almost a
month. Will Bigelow secured time-tables and laboriously mapped out his
semi-annually contemplated trip to the East: like the others
destined never to come off. Tracey Tanner went to work for Graham and
Duncan. The _Citizen_ gained eighteen subscribers; four old ones
paid up their accounts. Babies were born, people married and died,
loved and hated, lived in striving or sloth, accomplished or failed.
Roland Barnette paid ostentatious attentions to Bess Gabriel, who
tolerated him simply because she didn't much like Josie; but, blighted
by Josie's supreme indifference, this budding passion drooped and
failed by mutual consent of both parties concerned. Angie Tuthill
became more conspicuously than ever the orb of Tracey's universe.
Duncan walked home with Josie on two weekday evenings and twice on
Sundays, and learned how to play Halma and Parcheesi, as well as how
long to linger at the front gate in the gloaming, saying good-night.
Eight young women of the town set their caps for him, at one time or
another and... set them back again, because he was too blind to see. As
a body they united with the female element in Radville in condemning
Josie for a heartless flirt, and sympathising with Nat, behind his
back, for being so nice and at the same time so easily taken in. Mrs.
Lockwood gave a Bridge party which failed as such because Radville knew
not Bridge; but everybody went and played progressive euchre, instead.
The drug-store prospered in moderation, Sothern and Lee vainly
contesting its conquering campaign. And Duncan grew thoughtful.

One has more time to think unselfishly in Radville than in a great
city, where there's rarely more time than enough to think of one's own
concerns. And Duncan was making time to think about others--notably,
Betty Graham. The girl was, as usual, shy, reticent, reserved; she kept
her thoughts to herself, sharing the most intimate not even with old
Sam, who _would_ talk; but Duncan divined that she was unhappy.
The easier circumstances of the family had provided her with a few
simple frocks, adequate clothing which she had gone without for years,
and with a sufficiency of wholesome and appetising food: with these,
peace of mind should likewise have come to her, and content. But Duncan
thought they hadn't. Relieved, on Tracey's engagement, of any share in
the store service, she had only the housework for herself and father to
occupy her; her associations with the girls of her age were distant and
constrained. Usage wears into tradition in the Radvilles of our land;
even with the young folks this is so; and in Betty's case, the girl had
for so long been "out of it," debarred by her unfortunate circumstances
from participation in the pastimes, pleasures and duties of her
generation, that by common consent, unspoken but none the less
absolute, she remained an outsider. You might say that she relied on
her father alone for companionship. Duncan she avoided, unobtrusively
but with pains; he consorted with those with whom she had nothing in
common, and she would not thrust herself upon him or seem to seek his
notice. Her early suspicion and sullen resentment of his intrusion into
their affairs had vanished; there remained only a gnawing consciousness
that to him she was little or nothing, that his vision ranged above her
humble head. She was not the sort to take this ill; she was reasonable
enough to believe it natural. But she would not willingly intrude upon
his thoughts--who little knew how much she did occupy his leisure
moments.

He saw her go and come, a wistful shadow on the borders of his
occupations, self-contained, a little timid, but at the same time brave
in her own quiet, uncomplaining fashion. And the distant look in those
soft eyes he divined to be one of longing for that which she might not
possess--the advantages that other girls had, socially and
educationally, the pleasures they contrived, the attentions they
received, the thousand and one slight things that make existence life
for a woman. He saw her drooping insensibly day by day, growing a
little paler, a shade more aloof and listless. And he became infinitely
concerned for her.

He told himself he had solved the problem of her disease, but its
remedy remained beyond his reach. The business was doing very well
indeed, but it was still young and must be subjected to as few
financial drains as possible; as it ran, there was an income sufficient
to board, lodge and clothe the three of them, maintain the credit of
the partnership, and now and again admit of a slight but advantageous
addition to the stock or fixtures. Things would certainly be better in
the course of time, but... Kellogg he would not beg another dollar of,
the bank was an equally impossible resource; there wasn't a chance in a
hundred that Lockwood would refuse to accommodate the growing concern
with money in reason, but the concern, individually and collectively,
would never ask it of him. There remained--?

It came to pass that he left the store early one evening, excusing
himself on the plea of some slight indisposition, and lost himself for
the space of two hours. I mean to say, that no one knew where he went
until long after. When he came home some time after ten he told me he
had been for a walk....

He found himself shortly after eight at pause by the gate to the Bohun
place. The night was dark and murmurous with a sibilant wind that sent
the leaves drifting, softly clashing one with another. At the far end
of the straight brick walk, up through the formal grounds, he could
just see the glimmer of the stately columns, and, between them, to one
side, a little twinkling light. The gate was closed, but he tried it
and found it on the latch. He entered and scuffled up the walk, ankle
deep in fallen leaves. His footfalls as he crossed the porch sounded
startlingly loud by contrast; he even fancied a note of indignation in
the cavernous echoes of the knocker on the front door. He waited with a
thumping heart, aware that he was venturing where even fools would fear
to tread.

An aged negro butler, one of the freed slaves brought from Virginia by
the Bohuns, admitted him to the hall and took his card, smothering his
own wonderment. For in those days nobody disturbed the silence and the
peace of decay of the Bohun mansion save its master. And Duncan had
long to wait in the wide, gloomy, musty hall before the servant
returned.

"Cunnul Bohun will see yo', suh," he said, and ushered him into the
library--a great, high-ceiled, shadowy room illuminated by a single
lamp, tenanted by the old colonel alone.

Bohun received the young man standing: he was as courteous beneath his
own roof as he was impossible away from it. A quaint old figure, with
his grey hair tousled and his dressing-gown draped grotesquely from his
shoulders, he stood by the fireplace, Duncan's card between his
fingers, and bowed ceremoniously.

"Mr. Duncan, I believe?"

Nat returned the bow. "Yes, sir," he said. "Will you be good enough to
pardon this intrusion, Colonel Bohun, and spare me five minutes of your
time?"

The colonel nodded. "At your service, sir," he replied, and waited
grimly--perhaps not unsuspicious of the nature of his visitor's errand,
since he could not have been ignorant of his place in Radville.

Duncan had his own way of getting at things--generally more circuitous
than now, though he struck on a tangent sufficiently acute momentarily
to puzzle Bohun.

"May I inquire, sir, if you are acquainted with the firm of L.J.
Bartlett & Company of New York?"

"I have heard of it, Mr. Duncan, through the newspapers."

"You know that it ranks pretty high, then, I presume?"

"I understand that such is the case."

"Then would you mind doing me the favour of writing to Mr. Henry
Kellogg, the junior partner, and asking him about me?"

The colonel stiffened. "May I ask why I should do anything so
uncalled-for?"

"Because it isn't uncalled-for, sir. I mean, you won't think so after
I've explained."

Bohun inclined his head, searching Nat's face with his keen, bright
eyes.

"You see, sir, it's this way: I want you to entrust me with a
considerable sum of money, and naturally you wouldn't do that without
knowing something about me."

"I incline very much to doubt that I should do it in any event, Mr.
Duncan."

"Oh, don't say that. You don't know the circumstances, as yet." Nat
jerked his head earnestly at the colonel. "You see, you're said to be
one of the richest men in town, and I'm certainly one of the poorest,
so of course I turn to you in a case like this."

"In a case like what, Mr. Duncan?" Something in the young man's manner
seemed to tickle the colonel; Duncan could have sworn that the eyes
were twinkling beneath the savagely knitted brows.

"Well, you must understand I'm in business here in Radville--a partner
in a growing and prospering concern--ah--doing--very well, in point of
fact."

"Yes?"

"But we haven't any spare capital; in fact, we haven't got any capital
worth mentioning. But the business is entirely sound and solvent."

"I congratulate you, sir."

"Thank you very much.... Now I'm interested in a rather singular
case: that of a young woman--a girl, I should say--daughter of my
partner. She's a good girl and wonderfully sweet and fine, sir. She
comes of one of the best families in these parts--"

"On her mother's side," suggested the colonel drily.

"So I'm told, sir. But she's been neglected. Circumstances have been
against her. She hasn't had a real chance in life, but she ought to
have it, and I'm going to see that she gets it, one way or another."

"You haven't finished?" said the colonel coldly, as he paused for
breath and thought.

"Not quite, sir," said Duncan. "Good sign!" he told himself: "he hasn't
ordered me thrown out yet." And he hurried on, speaking quickly in the
semi-humorous style he had, more arresting to the attention than
absolute gravity would have been.

"To come down to cases, sir, she ought to be sent to a good
boarding-school for a few years. It'll make a new woman of her--a woman
to be proud of. She's got that in her--it only needs to be brought
out."

"And before you leave, sir," said the colonel with significant
precision, "will you be so kind as to inform me why you think this
should interest me?"

"No," said Duncan candidly; "I haven't got the nerve to. But what I
wanted to propose was this: that you lend me five hundred dollars to
cover the expense of the first year, on condition that I represent the
money as coming from the profits of the business and, in short, keep
the transaction between ourselves absolutely quiet. If you'll inquire
of Mr. Kellogg he'll tell you I can be trusted to keep my word.
Furthermore"--he galloped, suspecting that his time was perilously
short and desiring to get it all out of his system--"I'll guarantee you
repayment within a year, and that you shan't be annoyed this way a
second time."

Bohun looked him over from head to foot, bowed in silence, and
turning--both had stood throughout this passage--grasped a bell-rope by
the chimney, and pulled it violently.

Duncan turned to the door, hat in hand, realising that he had his
answer and was lucky to get away with one so mild. Only the emergency
could have spurred him to the point of so outrageous an impertinence.

In the desolate fastnesses of that dreary house somewhere a bell
tinkled discordantly. A moment later the white-headed darky butler
opened the door.

"Suh?" he said.

Colonel Bohun essayed to speak, cleared his throat angrily, and
indicated Duncan with a courteous gesture.

"Scipio," said he, "this gentleman will have a glass of wine with me."

"Yassuh!" stammered the negro, overcome with astonishment.

Bohun turned to his guest. "Won't you be seated, Mr. Duncan?" he said.
"You have interested me considerably, sir, and I should be glad to
discuss the matter with you."

Speechless, Duncan gasped incoherently and moved toward a chair as the
servant reappeared with a tray on which was a decanter of sherry and
two old-fashioned, thin-stemmed crystal glasses. He placed this on the
library table, filled the glasses, and at a sign from Bohun retired.

"Sir," said the colonel, indicating the tray, "to you."

"I--I thank you, sir." Duncan lifted one of the glasses. Bohun took up
the one remaining, and held it toward his guest with the gracious
gesture of a bygone day.

"I hold it a privilege, sir," he said, "to drink to the only gentleman
of spirit it's been my good fortune to meet this many a year."

By way of an aside, it should be mentioned that this was the first and
only drink Duncan took while he lived in Radville.




XVII


TRACEY'S TROUBLES

Probably nothing ever gave rise to more comment in Radville than Betty
Graham's departure to spend the winter at a boarding-school near
Philadelphia. Hardly anyone knew anything about it--in fact, the rumour
of it was just being noised about and contemptuously discredited on all
hands--when Tracey galloped down Main Street Monday morning with the
news that she had left on the early train. He himself had remained in
ignorance of the impending event until requested to carry Betty's bag
down to the station....

She left under convoy of a certain Mrs. Hamilton, who lived in
Philadelphia and had been visiting her cousin, Mrs. Will Bigelow.
Duncan had met this lady at a church sociable and, apparently, taken a
liking to her; for he prevailed upon her, via Sam Graham and Will
Bigelow, to see the girl safely to her school, after superintending the
purchase of a suitable wardrobe in Philadelphia.

So Betty was gone--herself, I believe, no less surprised and
incredulous than the rest of us.

Radville was at first stupefied, then clamorous; but there was little
information to be got out of old Sam. I found him busy working on his
new model and much preoccupied with that. When interrogated and given
to understand that I would not be put off, he roused a bit, but beyond
being unquestionably a very happy man, seemed himself slightly dazed by
the amazing circumstances. I learned from him that Nat had evidently
made all his plans in advance, but had withheld his announcement of
them until the Saturday prior to that Monday; and then he had fairly
whirled Betty and her father off their feet and left them no time to
think or to raise objections.

"There's no use at all arguing with that boy," Sam told me, with the
fond smile that I was beginning to recognise as the invariable
accompaniment of his thoughts about Nat; "when he says a thing must
be, it must. When he first came here I told him he was a wonderful
business man, and he laughed at me, but now I know he is. Why, he gave
Betty a hundred dollars to buy clothes with in Philadelphia, and said
he'd have more for her by Christmas, besides paying all the expenses of
that school--which must be considerable. I don't see how the store's
going to stand the strain--though it's doing splendidly since he came
in, splendidly!--but he says it's all right, and so it must be...."

Duncan himself refused to be interviewed. He told everybody who had
the impudence to mention the matter to him, that it was Mr. Graham's
affair: Mr. Graham was a substantial business man, he said, and if he
chose to send his daughter away to school he had a perfect right to do
so. I don't believe even Josie Lockwood got more than that out of him,
for if she had we would have heard of it; and Josie was unmistakably a
little jealous, and undoubtedly questioned Nat.

One direct result of it all was to hasten Josie's own leave-taking. It
would never do to let the Grahams eclipse the Lockwoods, you see. Josie
had been talking of going to a school in Maryland, but Betty's move to
a fashionable centre like Philadelphia made her change her mind; and
arrangements were made by which Josie was able to go Betty one better:
a young ladies' seminary in New York City itself received Josie. She
left us bereaved about a week after Betty vanished from our ken, but
promised to be back for the Christmas holidays--an announcement which
Duncan received with expressions of chastened joy, as he did her
promise to write to him regularly, in return for his covenant to
respond promptly.... Betty, by the way, had made no such arrangement;
but she wrote twice a week to old Sam, and I understand she never
failed to include a message to Nat.

Betty was happy, she protested in every communication, and wholly
content. She was getting along. The other girls liked her and she liked
them (these statements being made in the order of their relative
importance). Lots of them, of course, were frightfully swell (Betty
annexed "frightfully" at school, by the by) and had all sorts of
clothes; but Betty was perfectly content with her modest outfit, and
none of the other girls seemed to mind how she dressed. They were all
kind and nice, and she'd never had such a good time.... I quote these
expressions from memory of Sam's digest of her letters.

Of Josie I heard less; I know that Graham and Duncan's mail seldom
lacked a personal communication to Duncan, postmarked at New York; our
postmaster told me so. But Duncan was reticent, and the Lockwoods said
little. I gathered an impression that Josie was not altogether happy
in her new surroundings.... One inferred there was a difference between
New York and Philadelphia, that one was less friendly and sociable
than the other.

Josie kept her promise and came home for Christmas. She was reticent as
to her impressions of the New York seminary, but seemed extremely glad
to be home, notwithstanding the fact that Nat had apparently contracted
no disturbing alliances with the other belles of our village. And
Roland remained true--a reliable second string to Josie's bow. Roland
was working hard at the bank, with an application that earned Blinky
Lockwood's regard and outspoken approbation; and his Christmas raiment
proved the sensation of the season. But none of us believed he had any
chance against Duncan: Josie's attitude toward the latter was such
that we confidently anticipated the announcement of their engagement
before she went away again. But it didn't come, for some reason. We
bore up under the disappointment bravely, all things considered,
sustained by a very secure feeling that the proclamation couldn't be
long deferred.

In passing, I should mention that Betty didn't come home once
throughout the entire school term. The Christmas and Easter holidays
she spent with a girl friend at her Philadelphia home.

Meanwhile, life in our town simmered gently. Things went on much as
they might have been expected to. I don't recall much essential to this
narrative, in the way of events; and part of the ground I've covered on
earlier pages. Duncan continued to make progress: for one thing, I
recall that he put in hot soda with whipped cream, which helped a lot
to hold the trade regained in the summer from Sothern and Lee. And he
bought a new soda fountain, a very magnificent affair, installing it in
the early spring. Graham and Duncan's, in short, became a town
institution: to it Radville pointed with pride....

He remained reserved, retiring, inconspicuous, and puzzling to our
understanding. In his effort (never very successful) to strike off the
shackles of modern slang, he fell into a way of speech that bewildered
those unable to realise what an abiding sense of humour underlay it--as
water runs beneath ice--more, I think, a matter of intonation and
significant silences, than a mere play upon words and phrases; which,
coupled with an unshakable sobriety of demeanour, furnished us with
wonder and some admiration, but no resentment. We liked him pretty
well and mostly unanimously: he was a good fellow, if queer; entitled
to his idiosyncrasy, if he chose to keep one....

There was a certain night, by way of illustration--a bitter night,
along toward the first of January--when trade was dull, as it always is
after Christmas, and there was nobody in the store save Nat and Tracey.
Each had their task, whatever it may have been, and each was busied
with it, but of the two Tracey seemed the more restless. His ample, if
low, forehead was decidedly corrugated; his always rosy face owned an
added trace of scarlet--a flush of perturbation; his chubby hands were
inexpert, clumsy. He stumbled, fumbled, forgot and (in our homely
phrase) flummoxed generally; his mind was elsewhere, and his hands and
feet went anywhere but where they should have gone: a condition which
eventually excited Duncan's attention.

He broke a long silence in the store. "What's the trouble, Tracey?"

Tracey pulled up with a stare of confusion. "I--I dunno, Mr. Duncan; I
was thinkin', I guess."

"Anything gone wrong?"

"Not yet." Niobe would have made the response with a greater show of
cheer.

Duncan looked up curiously, struck by the boy's tone. "Somebody been
demonstrating that your doll's stuffed with sawdust, Tracey?"

"No-o, but..."

"Well?"

"Say, Mr. Duncan--" Tracey's confusion became terrific.

"Say on, Mr. Tanner."

The interjection diverted Tracey's train of thought to an
inconsiderable siding. "I only called you Mr. Duncan," he said,
aggrieved, "'cause you're my boss."

"That's a poor excuse, Tracey. You call Mr. Graham 'Sam,' and he's
likewise your boss."

"I know. But it's diff'runt."

"I don't see it. Even Nats have their place in the cosmic system,
Tracey."

"I dunno what that is, but you ain't like Sam."

"The loss is mine, Tracey. Proceed."

"But, Mr. Duncan..."

"I beg of you, speak to me as to a friend."

Tracey struggled perceptibly. The words, when they came, were blurted.
"Ah... I was only thinkin' 'bout Angie."

"Do you ever think about anything else?"

"No," Tracey admitted honestly, "not much. But I was wonderin'--"

"Well?"

"Are you stuck on Angie, Mr. Duncan?" demanded Tracey desperately.

"Great snakes! I hope not!" Duncan cast an anxious glance about him,
and discovered the poster depicting the gentleman in strange attire
vainly endeavouring to free his overcoat (I believe it's his overcoat)
from the bench upon which a pot of glue has been spilled. He lifted a
reverent hand to the card. "Tracey," he said solemnly, "I swear to you
that not even that indispensable article of commerce could stick me on
Angie."

The boy sighed. "Thank you, Mr. Duncan. I was only worryin' because you
and Angie is singin' together in the choir, now Josie Lockwood's gone
to school, an'--an' Angie's the purtiest girl in town--and I was 'fraid
't you might like her best, when Josie's away. An' I wanted to ask you
to pick out s'mother girl."

Duncan chuckled silently. "Tracey," he said presently, "it strikes me
you must be in love with Angie."

The boy gulped. "I--I am."

"And I think she's rather partial to you."

"Do you, really, Mr. Duncan?"

"I do. Do you want to marry her?"

"Gee! I can't hardly wait!... Only," Tracey continued, disconsolate,
"it ain't no use, really. She's so purty and swell and old man
Tuthill's so rich--not like the Lockwoods, but rich, all the same--an'
I'm only the son of the livery-stable man, an' fat an'--all that--an'--"

"Nonsense, Tracey!" Nat interrupted firmly. "If you really want her and
will follow the rules I give you, it's a cinch."

"Honest, Mr. Duncan?"

"I guarantee it, Tracey. Listen to me...." And Duncan expounded
Kellogg's rules at length, adapting them to Tracey's circumstances, of
course; and throughout maintained the gravity of a graven image. "You
try, and you'll see if I'm not right," he concluded.

"Gosh! I b'lieve you are!" Tracey cried admiringly. "I'm just going to
see how it works."

"Do, if you'd favour me, Tracey."

Tracey was quiet for a time, working with the regularity of a mind
relieved. But presently he felt unable to contain himself. Gratitude
surged in his bosom, and he had to speak.

"Sa-y, lis'en...."

"Proceed, Tracey."

"Say, Mist--Nat, you've treated me somethin' immense."

"Your mistake, Tracey. I haven't treated anybody since I've been here:
I'm on the wagon."

"I mean just now, when we was talkin' 'bout me an' Angie. I'd--I'd like
to help you the same way, if I could."

"You would?" Duncan eyed the boy apprehensively, wondering what was
coming.

"Yes, indeedy, I would. An' p'rhaps I kin tell you somethin' that
will."
 "Speak, I beg."

"You--er--you're tryin' to court Josie Lockwood, ain't you?"

"Oh!" said Nat. "So that was it! That's a secret, Tracey," he averred.

"All right. Only, if you are, she's your'n."

"Just how do you figure that out?"

"Oh, I kin tell. She was in here to-night with Roland."

"To-night?"

"Yes, just afore you come home from prayer-meetin'. She was lookin'
for you, and when she seen you wasn't here, she wouldn't wait for no
soda nor nothin'. Said she had a headache an' was goin' home. Roland
went with her, but she didn't want him to. You just missed seein'
her."

"Heavens, what a blow!"

"But Roland's takin' her home needn't upset you none."

"Thank you for those kind words, Tracey." Nat sighed and passed a
troubled hand across his brow. "You're a true friend."

"I'm tryin' to be, Nat, same's you are to me." Tracey thought this
over. "But you ain't foolin' me, are you?" he asked presently. "I mean
'bout bein' a true friend?"

"Why should I?"

"Ah, I dunno. You're so cur'us, sometimes. I ain't never sure whether
you mean what you're sayin' or not."

"Oh, don't say that."

"Well, I ain't the only one. Everybody in town says they don't
understand you, half the time."

Duncan left his counter and moved over to that at which Tracey was
occupied. His face was entirely serious, his manner deeply
sympathetic. "Tracey," he said, dropping a hand on the boy's shoulder,
"do you know, nothing in life is harder to bear than not to be
understood?"

Tracey wrestled with this for a moment, but it was beyond him.

"Then why the hell don't you talk so's folks'll know what it's about?"
he demanded heatedly.

"Because... _Hm_." Duncan hesitated, with his enigmatic smile.
"Well, because the rules don't require it."

"What d'you mean by _that_?" Tracey exploded.

Nat couldn't explain, so he countered neatly. "This is one of your
Angie... evenings, isn't it, Tracey?"

"Yep, but--"

"Well, you hurry along. I'll close up the shop."

Tracey had slammed on his hat and was struggling into his overcoat
almost as soon as the words were out of Nat's mouth.

"Kin I?" he cried excitedly.

"Yes," said Nat, watching the boy turn up his collar and button his
overcoat to the throat, "I haven't got the heart to keep you."

"Ah, thanks, Mr. Duncan."

"But, Tracey..."

The boy paused at the door. "What?"

"Remember what I told you. Don't you make too much love. Let Angie do
that."

"Gosh, that'll be the hardest rule of all for me!" A shadow clouded
Tracey's honest eyes. "But I got to do it that way, anyway. I can't
ask her to marry me yit. I can't afford to get married."

"It's a contrary world, Tracey, a contrary world!" sighed Nat in a tone
of deepest melancholy.

"What makes you say that? You kin git married's soon's you want to."

"You think so, Tracey?"

"All you got to do's ask Josie--"

"I'm almost afraid you're right."

"Why? Don't you want to git married?"

"Well"--Nat smiled--"no. Don't believe I do. Not just now, at any
rate."

"Well, you don't have to if you don't want to.... G'd-night."

"Yes, I do," Nat told Tracey's back. "The rules say so. If the girl
asks me, I must."

He grimaced ruefully beneath his wisp of a moustache. "Anyhow, I've got
a few months left...."




XVIII


A BARGAIN IS A BARGAIN

So the winter wore away.... And as spring drew nigh upon our valley,
Duncan seemed to grow perturbed, even as he had been in the autumn
before Betty went away. He was pondering another scheme for the
betterment of the condition of those he cared for, and gave it ample
consideration before he broached it to old Sam, after swearing him to
secrecy.

He had to propose nothing more or less than an abandonment of the old
Graham housekeeping quarters above the store and a removal of the
_menage_ bodily to a vacant house on Beech Street, near the store,
which could be rented, partly furnished, at a moderate rate.

To begin with (thus ran his argument) the store itself was growing too
small for the volume of business it commanded. More room was needed,
both for storage and laboratory purposes, to say nothing of
accommodation for Sam's models and work-bench. The latter had already
been moved upstairs for the winter, the shed in the backyard being too
cold to work in; and the laboratory end of the business was growing at
such a rate that it was crowding the prescription counter to the
wall--so to speak. You see, there really wasn't a more clever
analytical chemist in the northern part of the State than Sam Graham,
and now that the drug-store was becoming an influence in the
neighbourhood he was receiving commissions from physicians operating in
districts as far as fifty miles away. So a room was needed for that
branch of the business alone.

Moreover, a separate residence distinctly befitted the dignity of a
man who was at once a prominent inventor and one of Radville's leading
merchants (vide a "Personal" in the late issue of the Radville
_Citizen_), to say nothing of the social position of his
daughter--meaning Betty. And the house Duncan had his metaphorical eye
upon was large enough to shelter Nat himself in addition to the Graham
family. Thus they might pool their living expenses to the economical
advantage of each.

Finally, it would be a great and glad surprise for Betty on her
homecoming.

Graham fell in with the scheme without a murmur of dubiety or dissent.
Whatever Nat proposed in Sam's understanding was right and feasible;
and even if it wasn't really so, Nat would make it so.... They engaged
the house and moved. Miss Ann Sophronsiba Whitmarsh, a maiden lady of
forty-five or thereabouts, popularly known as "Phrony," had been coming
in by the day to "do for" old Sam in the rooms above the shop. She was
engaged as resident housekeeper for the new establishment, and entered
upon her duties with all the discreet joy of one whose maternal
instincts have been suppressed throughout her life. She mothered Sam
and she mothered Nat and she panted in expectation of the day when she
would have Betty to mother. Incidentally, she was one of the best
housekeepers in Radville, and cooperated with all her heart with Nat
in the task of making a home out of the new house. They arranged and
disarranged and rearranged and discarded old furniture and bought new
with almost the abandon of a newly married couple fitting out their
first home.... It was surprising what they managed to accomplish with
it; when they were finished, there wasn't a prettier nor a more
home-like residence in all Radville--and Phrony Whitmarsh was Nat's
slave, even as Miss Carpenter had been. She gave him all the credit for
everything praiseworthy about the place: and with some reason; for, as
a matter of fact, he had spared himself not at all in the business of
scheming and contriving to make the new home suitable for the
reception of Betty Graham....

It's interesting when one has come to my time of life, to sit and
speculate on the singular mental blindness of mortal man, such as that
which kept Nat unaware of the real, rock-bottom reason why he was
working so hard on the Beech Street house. I daresay the young idiot
thought his motives as much selfish as anything else--told himself that
he wanted a comfortable home--and this was his way of securing one--and
all that rot. At all events, he told me as much, quite seriously--
seemed to believe it himself; and this, in spite of the fact that Miss
Carpenter had done everything imaginable to make him comfortable....

Josie Lockwood came home again for the Easter holidays, but didn't
return to finish her term in the New York school. Just why, we never
discovered: the Lockwoods furnished us with no really satisfying
explanation; they said that Josie didn't like New York, but I've always
doubted that, especially since Josie married and insisted on moving
straightway to that metropolis. I suspect she didn't get along with
the class of young women with whom she was thrown at school, and I'm
pretty certain she was uneasy about Nat all the time she was so far
away from him. Anyway, she elected to remain in Radville and keep the
young man dancing attendance on her day in and out. Which he did, as in
duty bound; he liked the game less and less all the time, but Kellogg
held his promise....

It was during this period, between the Easter vacation and the end of
the spring school term, that Roland Barnette's animosity toward Duncan
became virulent. Looking back, I can recall the symptoms of his waxing
hostility--as, for instance, the evening he spent in the
_Citizen_ office, poring over back files of our exchanges. That
seemed innocent enough at the time, a harmless freak on the part of the
young man, and no one paid much attention to it; but it led to great
things, in the end, and incidentally did Duncan a service which
probably could have been accomplished through no other agency. This,
however, is something that Roland doesn't realise to this day; and I'm
inclined to doubt if you could ever make him understand it.

Josie, of course, was prompt to oust Angie Tuthill from her place in
the choir. After that she sang with Nat on Friday nights as well as
Wednesdays and twice per Sunday. Between whiles she was a pretty
constant patron of the store. There was no longer the least doubt in
the collective mind of the town as to the inclination of Josie's
affections. Nat himself gave evidence of his appreciation of the
gravity of the situation, managing by some admirable diplomacy to evade
the issue until the very last moment. But with the three--Roland, Nat,
and Josie--so involved, we sensed a storm below the horizon, and
awaited its breaking, if not with avidity, at least with quickened
apprehension.

The culmination came the day before Betty was to return--a day late in
May, I remember, and a Friday at that.

It began along toward evening. Duncan, alone in the store, was busy
behind the prescription counter. The day had been humid, warm and
sultry, and the doors and windows were open. The air was bland and
still, and sound travelled easily. He could hear the musical clanking
of hammers in Badger's smithy, on the next block, the deep-throated
_hoot-toot_ of the late afternoon train as it rushed down the
valley, sounds of fierce altercation from the home of Pete Willing near
by, a boy rattling a stick along palings down on Main Street.... But he
did not hear anybody enter the store: absorbed with his task, he
thought himself quite alone until a well-kenned voice reached his ear.

"Well!" it said, unctuous with appreciation of the sight of him.
"_Old_ Doctor Duncan!"

He let the pestle fall from his hand and jumped as if he had been stuck
with a pin. His jaw dropped and his eyes bulged. "Great Scott!" he
cried; and in a twinkling was round the counter, throwing himself into
the arms of a man whom he hailed ecstatically: "Harry, by all that's
wonderful!" He fairly danced with delight. "Henry Kellogg, Esquire!"
he cried, holding him at arms' length and looking him over. "What in
thunderation are you doing here?"

Kellogg freed himself, only to seize both Nat's hands and squeeze them
violently. "Wanted to see you," he replied, beaming. "On my way to
Cincinnati on business--thought I'd drop off for a night and size you
up. My, but it's good to get a look at you! How are you?"

"Me? Look at me--picture of health. Harry, you've made a new man of
me." Duncan pranced round his friend in a mild frenzy. "No booze--no
smokes--no swears--work! I feel like a two-year-old: I could do a
Marathon without turning a hair. Watch me kick up my heels and neigh!"
He paused for breath. "And you?"

"Fine as silk--but you've got it on me, Nat, physically. You're a sight
to heal the blind."

"And listen!" Nat crowed: "I'm a business man. Didn't you believe it?
Pipe my shop!"

Kellogg checked to obey the admonition of Duncan's gesticulations, and
took a long look round the store. "Gad!" said he. "I'm blowed if it
isn't true! It _was_ hard to credit your letters. But it's great,
old man. I congratulate you, with all my heart."

"Just wait and I'll tell you all about it. But first tell me how long
you're going to be here."

"Well, I plan to hang around with you a couple of days. My business in
the West isn't pressing."

"Good!"

"Which is the least worst hotel?"

"There ain't no such thing in the whole giddy town.... No, none of that
hotel stuff, now I I'm going to put you up--and I'll do it in style,
too. I wrote you about taking a new place for the Grahams?"

"Yes, and I'm mighty keen to meet 'em. The girl here?"

"Betty? No; she's coming home to-morrow. But Graham himself is upstairs
in the laboratory. Take you up in a minute, but not before I've had a
good look at you."

Kellogg found himself a chair. "Well," he inquired, twinkling, "how's
the scheme working out? Are you really living up to all the rules?"

"Every singletary one."

"You have got a strong constitution.... Even prayer-meetings?"

"The church thing? Honest, Harry, I _own_
it."

"Bully for you, Nat. But how does it work? Was I right?"

"I should say you were. It's so easy it's a shame to do it. If this
thing ever should get into the papers there'd be a swarm of city men
lighting out for the Rube centres so thick you wouldn't be able to see
the sky."

"I knew it! Trust your Uncle Harry." Kellogg waited a time for further
particulars, but Duncan seemed stuck; his transports of the few
minutes just gone were sensibly abated; and the sidelong look he gave
Kellogg was both uneasy and rueful--apprehensive, indeed. So Kellogg
had to pump for news. "And you've made a strong play for the fond
affections of Lockwood's daughter?"

"Certainly not!"

"Not--?"

"You forget your rules." Nat grinned, whimsical. "I let her to make a
play for me."

"Of course. My mistake.... But how has it worked?"

"Oh! immense." Duncan's tone, however, was wholly destitute of
enthusiasm. He stuck his hands in his trousers' pockets and half turned
away from his friend, looking out of the window.

Kellogg smiled secretly. "You mean you've won her already?"

"Oh, there's nothing to it," said Duncan, shaking his head and meaning
just the exact opposite of what his words conveyed, for of such is our
modern slang.

"Then you're engaged?" Kellogg had understood perfectly, you see.

"No, not _yet_. I've got two months left--almost."

"So you have. And since she's so strong for you, there's no hurry: let
her take her time."

"I only wish she would." Duncan removed one hand from the pocket the
better to tug at his moustache. "It's got beyond that--to the point
where I have to keep dodging her."

"You don't mean it! That's splendid." Kellogg got up and slapped Nat's
shoulder heartily. "But don't overdo the dodging. She might get her
back up."

"Not she. She'd eat out of my hand, if I'd let her. You don't
understand."

"What's the matter, then? Aren't you strong for her?"

"I wish I were."

"But why? Is there another----?"

"No." Nat shook his head, honestly believing he was telling the truth.
"Only ... I don't look at things the way I did once."

"Just what do you mean by that?"

Nat, squaring himself to face Kellogg, was very serious, now, and
troubled. "See here, Harry," he said: "do you really want me to carry
out the rest of the agreement?"

"Most certainly I do. Why not?"

"Because I'm pretty well fixed here. The business is making good--and
so am I. It won't be long before I can pay you back, with interest, as
we agreed, without having to marry that poor girl and ... and draw on
her money to make good to you."

"You want to go back on our agreement?" demanded Kellogg, with a show
of disappointment and disgust.

"Yes and no. I won't break faith with you, if you insist, but I'd give
a lot if you'd let me off--let me pay back what you advanced and cry
quits.... When you outlined this scheme I was down and three times
out--willing to take a chance at anything, no matter how contemptible.
Now... well, it's different."

"Good heavens! You don't mean you'd be willing to _live_ here?"

Nat smiled, but not mirthfully. "I don't know," he hesitated; "I'm
afraid I'm beginning to like it."

"You, Nat?" Kellogg's amazement was unfeigned. "You, ready to spend
your life here slaving away in this measly store?"

Duncan grunted indignantly. "Hold on, now. Don't you call this a measly
store. There isn't a more complete drug-store in the State!"

"Do you hear that?" Kellogg appealed vehemently to the universe at
large. "Is it possible that this is Nat Duncan, the fellow who hated
work so hard he couldn't earn a living?... Gad, I believe I've arrived
just in time!"

"In time for what?"

"To save you from yourself, old man. Here's the heiress you came here
to cop out, ready and anxious, everything else coming your way and ...
and you're more than half inclined to back out.... You make me tired."

"I suppose I must. But I can't help it. I can't make you see how the
thing looks to me. You know--I've written you all about everything--
what this place has meant to me. Until I came here I never realised it
was in me to make good at anything. But here I have; I'm doing so well
that I'd actually have some self-respect if I wasn't bound to play this
low-down trick on Josie Lockwood. I've worked and succeeded and been
of some service to people who were worth it----"

"Who? Sam Graham?"

"He and his daughter----"

"Oh, his daughter!"

"Now get that foolish idea out of your head; there's nothing in it.
Betty's just a simple, sweet little girl, who's had a pretty hard time
and never a real chance in life--until I managed to give it to her. And
I'd feel pretty good about that if ... Oh, there's no use talking to
you!"

"No; go on; you're very entertaining." Kellogg laughed mockingly.

"Well, I have tried to keep to the terms of our understanding; I
singled out this Lockwood girl and worked all the degrees--didn't say
much, you know--no love-making--just let her catch me looking sadly
at her once in a while..."

"That's the way to work it."

"Yes, that's the way," Nat assented gloomily. "But the longer I keep it
up the meaner I feel and... I wish you'd agree to call it off. ...
These Rubes at first struck me as being nothing but a lot of jay
freaks, but when I got to know them I realised they were just as human
as we are. I like them now and... on the level, I'm getting kind of
stuck on church.... As for work, why, I eat it up!"

Kellogg laughed with delight "Nat," he cried, "my poor crazy friend,
listen to me: This working and church-going and helping old Graham is
all very noble and fine, and I'm glad you've done it. This drug-store
is a monument to the business ability that I always knew was latent in
you. And clean living hasn't done you any harm.... But now you're due
to come down to earth. This place pays you a neat profit. Well and
good! That's all it'll ever do. It's new to you now and you like the
novelty and you're having the time of your life finding out you're good
for something. But pretty soon it'll begin to stale on you, and before
long you'll find yourself hating it and the town--and then you'll be
back where you started. Now, I'm going to hold you to our bargain for
your own sake. If you're stuck on the town and the work you can keep
right on just as well after you're married; but when you do begin to
tire of it, you'll want that fortune to fall back on and do what you
like with. Don't let this chance slip--not on your life!"

"But," Nat argued feebly, "think of the injustice to the girl. From
the way I've behaved since I struck this burg she thinks I'm closely
related to the saints."

"Very well, then; I'll concede a point. If you really think you're
taking a mean advantage of her, when she proposes to you tell her all
about yourself--just the sort of a chap you've been. You needn't
mention our agreement, however. Then if she wants to drop you, I'll
have nothing to say."

"Thank you for nothing," said Duncan bitterly. "A bargain's a bargain.
I gave you my word of honour I'd go through with this thing, and I'll
stick to it. But I tell you now, I don't like it."

"Oh, I know how you feel, Nat. But I _know_ that some day you'll
come to me and say: 'Harry, if you had let me back out, I'd never have
forgiven you.'"

"All right," said Nat impatiently. "I presume you know best."

"You can bet I do. And now I'd like to meet old Graham."

"I'll take you right up--no, I can't. Here comes a customer. But you
just go through that door and upstairs; he'll be in the laboratory--the
front room--and he knows all about you. I'll join you just as soon as
Tracey gets back."




XIX


PROVING THE PERSPICUITY OF MR. KELLOGG

A customer came and went, and then Nat noticed that twilight was
beginning to darken the store. Though the hour wasn't late and the
evenings were long at that season, the windows faced the east, and
there were huge, overshadowing elms outside--just then heavy with
luxuriant foliage; so dusk was always early in the room.

It was one of Nat's axioms that a store, to be successful, should be
always brilliantly lighted. It was a bit expensive, perhaps, but in the
long run it paid. For that reason he installed electric light as soon
as he felt the business could afford it.

Now he moved to the windows and switched on the bulbs behind the huge
glass jars filled with tinted water. Returning, he was about to connect
up the remainder of the illuminating system, when Josie, entering,
stayed him. Later he was glad of this.

"Nat..."

He knew that voice. "Why, Josie!" he exclaimed in surprise, swinging
about to discover her standing on the threshold--very dainty and
fetching, indeed, in one of the summery frocks she had brought back
from New York.

She moved over to him, holding out her hand. He took it with disguised
reluctance. "Where's Tracey?" she asked with a look that first held his
eyes, then reviewed the store.

"This is his afternoon off," Nat reminded her.

"Then you're all alone?" she deduced archly.

"Oh, quite...."

"I'm so glad." She sighed and dropped into a chair by the soda-water
counter. "I wanted to see you--to talk to you alone."

He bit his lip in his annoyance, shivering with a presentiment. "What
about, Josie?"

"About Wednesday night--after prayer meeting. Why didn't you wait for
me?"

"Why--ah--I had to get back to the store, you know--there were some
cheques to be made out and sent off, and I'd forgotten them. Besides,"
he added on inspiration, "you were talking with Roland and I didn't
want to interrupt you."

"So you left me to go home with him?"

"Why, what else--"

"You're making me awful' unhappy." Her voice trembled.

"_I_, Josie?"

"Yes. You knew I didn't want to walk home with Roland."

"How could I know that?"

"I should think you ought to know it, Nat, unless you're blind.
Besides, I told you once."

"True," he fenced desperately, "but that was a long time ago; and how
could I be sure you hadn't changed your mind? Besides, you know, I
mustn't monopolise you. If I do...."

"Well?" she inquired sweetly as he paused on the lip of a break.

"Why, if I do--ah--"

"If you're afraid people will talk about us, seeing us so much
together, you needn't worry. They're doing that now."

"Why, Josie!"

"Yes, they are. We've been going together so long, and then suddenly
you don't seem to care about--care to be alone with me at all. This
is the first chance I've had to talk to you, when there wasn't somebody
else round, for I don't know how long. And even now you don't seem glad
to see me."

"You should _know_ I am...."

"You don't act like it."

"It's so unexpected," he muttered wretchedly.

"You didn't really think I wanted Roland Barnette to go home with me
Wednesday night, did you, Nat?"

"It seemed so, but ... that's all right. Why shouldn't you?"

She turned to him, trembling a little. "Must I tell you, Nat?"

"O, no!" he cried in dismay. "Please don't----!"

"I see I must," she persisted. "You're so blind. It----"

"Josie, don't say anything you'll be sorry for," he entreated wildly.

"I can't help it: I've got to. It was--it was because I wanted to be
with you.... There!" she gasped, frightened by her own forwardness.

"Now I've said it!"

Duncan grasped frantically at straws. "But you don't really mean it,
Josie: you know you don't," he floundered. "You're just saying that
because you--you have such a kind heart and--ah--don't want to hurt
me--ah--because----"

She stemmed the flood of his protestations with a hand on his arm.
"Nat," she said gently, looking up into his face, "would it make you
happy to know I really meant it?"

"Why--ah--why shouldn't it, Josie?"

"Then please believe me, when I say it."

"But I do believe it. I..." He stammered and fell still.

"Because I do like you, Nat, very much, and--and it's very hard for me
to know that folks think I'm pursuing you and that you're trying to
avoid me."

"Josie!" he exclaimed reproachfully.

"Well, that's the way it looks," she affirmed plaintively. "You don't
want it to, do you?"

"Why, no; of course I don't."

"Then why don't you stop it?" She watched his face, her manner coy and
yielding. "Nat," she said in a softer voice, "if you like me as well as
I like you----"

He moved away a pace or two. "Ah, child!" he said, with a feeling that
the term was not misapplied, somehow, "you don't know what you're
saying."

"Yes, I do." She pouted. "I don't believe you... care anything about
me."

"Oh, Josie, please----"

"Well, anyway, you've never told me so." She turned an indignant
shoulder to him.

"How could I?"

"Why couldn't you?"

"But don't you see that I shouldn't, Josie?" He turned back to her
side, looked down at her, pleaded his defence with the fire of
desperation.

"Just think: you are an only daughter." Just what this had to do with
the case was not plain even to him. "An only daughter," he repeated--
"ah--not only your father's only daughter, but your mother's only
daughter. Your father--ah--is my friend. How unfair it would be to him."

But the girl interrupted with decision. "But papa wants you to... He
told me so."

He could only pretend not to understand. "But consider, Josie: you are
rich, an heiress: I'm a poor man. Would you like it to be said I was
after your money?"

"No one would dare say such a thing," she asserted with profound
conviction.

"Oh, yes, they would. You don't know the world as I do. And for all you
know, they might be right. How do you know that------"

"Nat!" A catch in her voice stopped him. "Don't say such horrid things!
I could tell: a woman always can. I know you would be incapable of such
a thing. Papa knows it, too. No one has ever got ahead of papa, and
_he_ says you are a fine, steady, Christian man, and he would
rather see me your wife than any------"'

"Josie!"

The interjection was so imperative that she was silenced. "Why, what,
Nat?" she asked, rising.

"The time has come," he declared; "you must know the truth."

"Oh, Nat!"

"I'm _not_ what you think me," he continued, dramatic.

_"Oh, Nat!"_

"Nor what your father thinks me, nor what anybody else in this town
thinks me. I'm not a regular Christian--it's all a bluff: I didn't
know anything about a church till I came here. I smoke and I drink and
I swear and I gamble, and I only cut them all out in order to trick you
into caring for me!"

"Oh, Nat, I don't believe it."

"Alas, Josie!" he protested violently, "it's true, only too true!"

"But you did it to win my love, Nat?"

"Ye-es." He saw suddenly that he had made a fatal mistake.

"Then, Nat, I will be your wife in spite of all!"

He found himself suddenly caught about the neck by the girl's arms. His
head was drawn down until her cheek caressed his and he felt her lips
warm upon his own.

"Josie!" he gasped.

"Nat, my darling!"

With a supreme effort he pulled himself together and embraced the girl.
"Josie," he said earnestly, "I--I'm going to try to be a good husband
to you.... And that," he concluded, _sotto voce_, "wasn't in the
agreement!"

She held him to her passionately. "Dearest, I'm so glad!"

"It makes me very happy to know you are, Josie," he murmured miserably.
And to himself, while still she trembled in his embrace: "What a cur
you are!... But I won't renege now; I'll play my hand out on the
square, with her...."

Upon this tableau there came a sudden intrusion. The back door opened
and Graham came in, Kellogg at his heels. It was the voice of the
latter that told the two they were discovered: a hearty "Hello! What's
this?" that rang in Nat's ears like the trump of doom.

In a flash the girl disengaged herself, and they were a yard apart by
the time that Graham, blundering in his surprise, managed to turn on
the lights at the switchboard. But even in the full glare of them he
seemed unable to credit his sight.

"Why, Nat!" he quavered, coming out toward the guilty pair. "Why,
Nat...!"

Duncan took a long breath and Josie's hand at one and the same time.
"Mr. Graham," he said coolly, "I'm glad you're the first to know it.
Josie has just ask--agreed to be my wife."

Old Sam recovered sufficiently to take the girl's hand and pat it. "I'm
mighty glad, my dear," he told her. "I congratulate you both with all
my heart."

"And so will I, when I have the right," Kellogg added, smiling.

"Oh, I forgot." Nat hastened to remedy his oversight. "Josie, this is
my dearest friend, Mr. Kellogg; Harry, this is Miss Lockwood."


Josie gave Kellogg her hand. "I--I," she giggled--"I'm pleased to meet
you, I'm sure."

"I'm charmed. I've heard a great deal of you, Miss Lockwood, from Nat's
letters, and I shall hope to know you much better before
long."

"It's awful' nice of you to say so, Mr. Kellogg."

"And, Nat, old man!" Kellogg threw an arm round Duncan's shoulder. "I
congratulate you! You're a lucky dog!"

"I'm a dog, all right," said Nat glumly.

"But we mustn't disturb these young people, Mr. Kellogg," Graham broke
in nervously.

"They'll--they'll have a lot to say to one another, I'm sure; so we'll
just run along. I'm taking Mr. Kellogg up to the house, Nat. You'll
follow us as soon as you can, won't you?"

"Yes--sure."

"I've got some news for you, too, that'll make you happy."

"Never mind about that; it'll keep till supper, Mr. Graham." Kellogg
laughed, taking the old man's arm. "Good-bye, both of you--good-bye for
a little while."

"Good-bye..."

"Wasn't that terrible!" Josie turned back to Nat when they were alone.
"I think it was real mean of Mr. Graham to turn on all the lights
that way," she simpered. "Somebody else might've seen."

"Yes," agreed the young man, half distracted; "but of course I daren't
turn them off again."

"Never mind. We can wait." Josie blushed.

"I'll just sit here and wait--we can talk till Tracey comes, and then
you can walk home with me."

"Yes, that'll be nice," he agreed, but without absolute ecstasy.

Fortunately for him, in his temper of that moment, Pete Willing reeled
into the shop, two-thirds drunk, with his face smeared with blood from
a cut on his forehead.

"'Scuse me," he muttered huskily. "Kin I see you a minute, Doc?"

He reeled and almost fell--would have fallen had not Duncan caught his
arm and guided him to a chair. "Great Scott, Pete!" he cried. "What's
happened to you?"

"M' wife..." Pete explained thickly.




XX


ROLAND SHOWS HIS HAND

"Perhaps I'd better go." Josie, fluttering with alarm and a little
pale, went quickly to the door.

Duncan followed her a pace or two. "I can't leave just now," he
stammered.

"I don't mind one bit. I don't want to be in the way. I'll telephone
from home.... Good-night, dearest!" On tiptoes she drew his face down
to hers and kissed him. "I'm so happy..."

Half dazed, Nat stared after her until her lightly moving figure merged
with the shadows beneath the trees and was lost. Then, with a sigh, he
turned back to Pete.

The sheriff had undoubtedly suffered at the hands of that militant
person, Mrs. Willing. "Great Scott!" Duncan exclaimed as he examined
the two-inch gash in his head. "That's a bird, Pete."

"M' wife done it," Willing muttered huskily. "Sh' threw side 'r th'
house at me, I think."

"Wife, eh?" The coincidence smote Duncan with redoubled force. He
shivered "Well, she certainly gave it to you good." He went behind the
counter to prepare a dressing for the wound, which, if wide, was
neither deep nor serious and gave him little concern for Pete.

The latter ruminated on the event, breathing stertorously, while Duncan
was fixing up a wash of peroxide. "She'll kill me some day," he
announced suddenly, with intense conviction in his tone.

"Oh, don't say that...."

Opposition roused Pete to a fury of assertion. "Yes, she will, sure!"
he bawled. Then his emotion quieted. "But I'd 'bout as soon be dead's
live with her, anyway."

"_Um_." Nat got some absorbent cotton and adhesive plaster. "Been
drinking again, hadn't you?"

"Yesh," Pete admitted with a leer of drunken cunning. "But she druv me
to it." He was quiet for a moment. "Mish'r Duncan," he volunteered
cheerfully, "you ain't got _no_ idee how lucky y'are y'aint married."

"Is that so?" Nat returned with the dressings.

"No idee'tall." Pete surrendered his head to Nat's ministrations. "'Nd
I hope y' won't never have."

"But I'm going to be married, Pete."

The sheriff assimilated this information and became abruptly
intractable. He jerked his head away and swung round in his chair to
argue the matter.

"Oh, no!" he expostulated. "Don't, Mish'r Duncan. Don't never do it.
Take warnin' from me."

"But I'm engaged, Pete."

"Maksh no diff'runsh--break it off." His voice rose to a howl of alarm.
"F'r Gaw's sake, break it off!--now, before it's too late! Do anythin'
rather'n that: drink--lie--steal--murder--c'mit suicide--don't care
what--only _keep single!_" "Here," said Duncan, laughing, "sit back
there and let me'tend to your head." He began to wash the wound with
the peroxide. "There: that'll sting a bit, but not long.... But
suppose, Pete, I'd get a lot of money by marrying?"

"No matter how mush y'get, 'tain't enough!"

"I'm inclined to think you're about right, Pete."

"You bet I'm right. I'm married 'nd _I know_."

Nat finished dressing the cut, smoothed down the ends of the adhesive
tape, and stood back. "That's all right, now. Go home, wash your face,
and sleep it off. Let me see you sober in the morning."

"Huh!" Pete chuckled derisively. "Ain't goin' home t'night."

"You've got to get some sleep: that's the only way for you to
straighten up."

"Well," agreed Pete, rising, "then I'll go over to the barn 'nd sleep
with the horse."

"Aren't you afraid he'll step on you?" asked Nat, amused.

"Maybe he will," Pete replied fairly, "but I'd ruther risk that 'n m'
wife."

He swerved and lurched toward the door. "Thanks, doc, 'nd g'night," he
mumbled, and incontinently collided with Roland Barnette.

Roland was working under a full head of steam, apparently; his
naturally sanguine complexion was several shades darker than the
normal, and he was seething with repressed emotion--excitement,
anticipated triumph, jealousy, envy and hatred: all centring upon the
hapless head of Nat Duncan. Plunging along with his head down, his
thoughts wholly preoccupied with his grievance and its remedy, he
bumped into Willing and cannoned off, recognising him with an angry
growl. The result of this was to stay Pete's departure; he grasped
the frame of the door and steadied himself, glaring round at the
aggressor.

"'Lo, Roland," he said, focussing his vision. "Whash masser?"

Roland disregarded him entirely. "Say, you!" he snorted, catching sight
of Nat. "I want to see you."

"Oh?" Nat drawled exasperatingly. He had never had much use for Roland,
and now with hidden joy he read the signs of passion on the boy's
inflamed countenance. Happy he would be, thought Nat, if Roland were to
be delivered into his hands that night. He owed the world a grudge,
just then, and needed nothing more than an object to wreak his
vengeance upon. "Well, I'll stake you to a good long look," he added
sweetly.

"Ah-h! don't you try to be so funny; you might get hurt."

Pete seemed to be suddenly electrified by Ro-land's matter. "Here!" he
interposed. "Whajuh mean by that?" And relinquishing his grasp on the
door, he reeled between the two and thrust his face close to Roland's.
"Who're you talkin' to, an'way?" he demanded, truculent.

Nat stepped forward quickly and grabbed Pete's arm. "That's all right,
Pete," he soothed him. "Don't get nervous. Roly won't hurt anybody."

The diminutive stung Roland to exasperation. "Why, damn you----!" he
screamed, and promptly became inarticulate with rage.

"Ah! ah! ah!" Nat wagged a reproving forefinger. "Naughty word, Roly!
Careful, or you'll sour your chewing gum."

"Now, say! Do you think----"

At this juncture Pete drowned his words with an incoherent roar, having
apparently reached the conclusion that the time had now arrived when it
would be his duty and pleasure to eat Roland alive. Nat saved the young
man by the barest inch; he grappled with Pete and drew himself aside
just in time.

"Steady, Pete!" he said quietly. "Steady, old man. Let Roland alone."

"Awrh, I ain't 'fraid of him!" spluttered Pete.

"Neither am I. Get out, won't you, and leave him to me."

"Aw'right." Pete became more calm. "I'll leave him 'lone, but all the
same I wan' it 'stinctly un'erstood I kin lick any man in town 'ceptin'
m' wife. G'night, everybody."

He gathered himself together and by a supreme effort lunged through the
door and into the deepening dusk.

"Well, Roly?" Nat asked, turning back.

His ironic calm gave Roland pause. For a moment he lost his bearings
and stammered in confusion. "I come in to tell you that me and you's
apt to have trouble," he concluded.

"Oh? And are you thinking of starting it?"

"You bet I'll start it, and I'll start it damn' quick if you don't
leave Josie Lockwood alone."

"So that's the trouble, is it?" commented Nat thoughtfully.

"Yes, that's the trouble. From now on I want you to let her alone, and
you'll do it, too, if you know what's best for you."

A suggestion of menace in his manner, unconnected with any hint of
physical correction, caught Nat's attention. He frowned over it.

"Just what do you mean by this line of talk?" he inquired blandly,
stepping nearer.

"I'll tell you what I mean." Roland clenched both fists and thrust his
chin out pugnaciously. "I'd been a-goin' steady with Josie Lockwood for
more'n a year before you come here and thought that, on account of her
money, you could sneak in and cut me out...."

"Was her money the reason you were after her, Roly?"

"What----?" The question brought Roland momentarily up in the wind.
"'Tain't none of your business if it was!" he snapped, recovering. "But
here's what I'm gettin' at." He tapped his breast-pocket with a sneer
of bucolic triumph. "Just about ten months ago," he continued
meaningly, "they was a cashier skipped out of the Longacre National
Bank in Noo Yawk, and they ain't got no track of him yet."

So this was why Roland had been so assiduous a student of the back
files in the Citizen office!

"Indeed?"

"Yes, indeed. I had my suspicions all along, but didn't say nothin',
but just to-day I got a description of him, and the description just
fits, Mr. Mortimer Henry."

"Just fits Mr. Mortimer Henry? But what has that----?"

"Ah, don't you try to seem too darn' innocent," Roland snarled. "You
can't fool me!"

A light dawned upon Nat, and laughter flooded his being, although
outwardly he remained imperturbable--merely mildly curious. But his
fingers were itching.

"So you think I'm the absconding cashier, eh, Roly?"

"You keep away from Josie 'r you'll find out what I think." Nat's
placidity deceived Roland, who drew the wholly erroneous conclusion
that he had succeeded in frightening his rival, and consequently dared
a few lengths further in his tirade. "Why, if I was to go to Mr.
Lockwood and tell him you're Mortimer Henry, alias Nat Duncan----"

Duncan's temper suddenly snapped like a taut violin string.

"That will do," he said icily. "That will be all for this evening,
thanks."

"Ah... Are you going to quit chasin' after Josie?"

"I'll begin chasing after you if you don't clear out of here."

"You better agree----"

[Illustration: "Betty!"]

Just there the storm burst. Ten seconds later Roland, with a confused
impression of having been kicked by a mule, picked himself up out of
the dust in the middle of the street and stared stupidly back at the
store. Nat was waiting in the doorway for a renewal of hostilities, if
any such there were to be. Seeing, however, that Roland had apparently
sated his appetite for personal conflict, he picked up a dark object at
his feet and held it out.

"Here's your hat, Roly," he called.

Roland spat out a mouthful of dust and swore beneath his breath. "Throw
it out here," he replied prudently.

Tossing him the hat, Nat turned contemptuously. "Come in again, any
time you want to apologise," he shouted over his shoulder, as an
afterthought.

He paused in the middle of the store and felt of his necktie. It proved
to be a little out of place, but otherwise he was as immaculate as was
his wont. He reviewed the encounter and laughed quietly.

"There's no cure for a fool," he mused....

The telephone bell roused him from his reverie. He went over to the
instrument, sat down, and put the receiver to his ear.

"Hello?" he said.... "Oh, hello, Josie! ... What's that?... That's
right, but I'm not used to it yet, you know.... Well, I'll try again.
Now--ready?"

He schooled his voice to a key of heartrending sentiment: "Hello,
darling.... How's that? ... Told your father? Told him what?... Oh,
about the engagement! Was he angry? ... Oh, he wasn't, eh? What did he
say? ... Wasn't that nice of him!..."

Conscious of a slight noise in the store he looked up. A young woman
had just entered. She paused just inside the door, smiling at him a
little timidly.

Without another word to his fiancee Nat put down the telephone and
hooked up the receiver.

"Betty!" he cried wonderingly.




XXI


AS OTHERS SAW HIM

If Nat's cry of recognition had been wondering, it was no less one of
delight. The surprise he felt was perfectly natural; Betty wasn't to
have returned until the morrow, and was therefore the last person he
had expected to see when he looked up from the telephone desk. But it
was the change in the girl that most stirred him: the change he had
prophesied, planned for, anticipated eagerly throughout the long seven
months of her absence; to have his expectations so wonderfully
fulfilled, and more than fulfilled, pleased him beyond expression. And
it's curious to speculate upon the fact that he fancied his greatest
pleasure came from the knowledge that old Sam would be so overjoyed....

It was really only a paraphrase of the old story of the grub and the
butterfly. The little, starveling drudge who had found him in the
store, that first day, had completely vanished; it was as if she had
never been. In her place he discovered a girl all grace and loveliness,
her slender figure ripening into gracious womanhood; a girl of mind and
heart and understanding, all fire and tenderness; demure, intelligent,
with a pretty pose of independence and sureness of herself moderated by
modesty and reserve. Her travelling dress of sober colouring and severe
lines became her bewitchingly. Beneath the brim of her dainty hat, with
veil thrown back, her dark hair waved back, glossy with the sheen of
perfect well-being, from a face serenely charming--the more so for her
slightly deepened flush; and the eyes that shone into Nat's danced with
the light of enjoyment, bred of his supreme astonishment....

"Nat, I'm so glad to see you again!"

He was speechless.

She laughed, put down her suit-case, and moved toward him, offering him
both her hands. He took them, stammering.

"It's such a surprise, Betty----!"

"I knew it would be. I just couldn't wait, Nat, when I found I could
get here by the night train instead of tomorrow morning. I haven't been
home, you know, but I couldn't resist the temptation to stop in here
and see--what the store looked like after all these months. Besides, I
thought that you or father----" Her eyes fell and she faltered,
withdrawing her hands.

By now he had himself in hand. "Why," he laughed, "you nearly took my
breath away. Even now I can hardly believe it..."

"Believe what, Nat?" she asked quickly.

"That you're the same little Betty Graham. I never saw such a change."

"It's a change for the better, isn't it, Nat?" she asked with a smile
half wistful.

"I should think it was. It's just marvellous!"

"Did I seem so very awful, then?"

"Nonsense. You know you didn't, only, now..."

"Then you think father will be pleased?"

"If he isn't, I'm blind!"

She looked away, embarrassed, and touched by his interest and his
feeling. "And does it make you a little proud, Nat?"

"Proud!" he exclaimed blankly.

"Because you know you've done it all. If there's any improvement in
Betty Graham to-day, it's because of you. If it hadn't been for
you----"

"Never in the world; you don't know what you're talking about, Betty.
Nobody but yourself could have brought about this change. It had to be
in you before it could come out. You know that."

She shook her head very decidedly, seating herself on one of the chairs
by the soda-fountain. "Oh, no," she contradicted calmly and sincerely.
"Why, Nat, don't you suppose I have any memory? You began making me a
better girl the very first day we met here in the store, by the things
you said to me. And ever since I've been watching you, while you were
making life a Heaven for father and me, and thinking that if I were a
man I'd try to be as near like you as I could."

"Oh, don't say that," he pleaded wretchedly.

"It's true.... And when you sent me away to school I promised myself
I'd try to repay you for the sacrifice you must be making for me; that
I'd follow your example as nearly as ever I could; that I'd work hard
and try to treat people the way you do--kindly, Nat, and considerately,
and bravely and tenderly and honestly----"

He dropped into a chair near her and buried his head in his hands.
"Don't!" he begged huskily. "Please, Betty, don't!"

But she wouldn't stop, little guessing how she was racking his heart in
her innocent desire to make him understand how deeply she appreciated
all he had done for her. "And, O Nat, it's worked so wonderfully! It's
made all the girls at school like me, and it's made me understand and
like everybody else better; and now, what's ten thousand times the best
of all, you notice an improvement the minute you see me! And I--I never
was so happy in all my life." She bent forward and took one of his
hands, patting it softly. "Nat, I think you're the very best man in the
whole world!"

"Don't!" he groaned. "Don't, for Heaven's sake!"

"Oh, I know, Nat--I know you don't like me to say this, but I must,
just the same, tell you the truth about yourself. It's so splendid to
live the life you do. You're all unconscious of it, but I want you to
realise it and know that I do, too. You've made everybody love you
and..."

But confusion silenced her, and she gently replaced his hand. For
several moments neither spoke. Then Nat broke the tension with a short,
hard laugh.

"That's right," he said inscrutably; "that was the idea...."

"Nat, what do you mean?"

He turned to her. "Betty, does it make you--feel that way toward me?"

She coloured divinely. "Why, Nat, of course ... Why, everyone..."

"That's why I came here, Betty," he pursued, blind to her
embarrassment. "I came here with the idea... of getting married...."

He was staring gloomily at the floor and could not see the light that
dawned upon the girl's face. Absorbed in the struggle with his
conscience he had no least suspicion of how his words were affecting
her. He knew only that he must somehow make a confession to her, that
to own her regard and gratitude on the terms that then existed between
them was utterly intolerable.

"You never guessed that, did you?"

"No," she breathed brokenly. "No, Nat, I--"

"Well, it's the truth and...." He rose and moved away. "But I can't
tell you just now--not now...."

"No, not now, Nat." Betty, too, got up. "I think I'd better go home and
see father--I mustn't forget--" she faltered, half blinded by the mist
of the happiness before her eyes.

"No--wait." She stopped to find his gaze full upon her; for the first
time he comprehended that she had not understood, that, worst of all,
she had misunderstood. "I must tell you," he blurted desperately, "I
must."

Instinctively she moved a step toward him. He hung his head.

"To-night, Betty--this evening, just a little while ago, I became
engaged to Josie Lockwood."

She stood as if petrified throughout a wait that seemed to both
interminable. Then he heard her catch her breath sharply. He looked up,
frightened, but she was smiling steadily into his face. Somehow he
found her hand in his.

"Oh, Nat dear," she said, "I'm so glad for you.... I wish you all the
happiness in the world. I ... Good-night."


The hand slipped out of Nat's. He did not move, but waited there with
his empty palm outstretched, despair in his eyes and hell in his heart,
while she walked quietly from the store.

After some time he awoke to the knowledge that she was gone.

"Blithering fool!" he growled. "Why didn't I know I loved her like
this?" He took a turn to and fro, distracted. "And now I've made a mess
of everything! Good Lord! what can I do? I must do something or go
mad!" He swung round behind the soda-fountain counter and seized a
bottle. "I know what! The rules are off! I can have a drink! I can have
two drinks! I can have a million drinks if I want 'em!"

Pouring a generous dose of raw whiskey into the glass he lifted it to
his lips and threw back his head. But the heavy bouquet of the liquor
was stifling in his nostrils, and the first mouthful of it almost
choked him. In a fury he flung the glass from him, so that it crashed
and splintered upon the floor. "Great Heavens!" he cried. "I don't like
the stuff any more.... But"--his gaze fell upon the cigar case--"I can
have a smoke. That'll help some!"

With feverish haste he snatched a cigar from the nearest box, gnawed
off one end, and thrusting the other into the alcohol lighter, puffed
vigorously. But to his renovated palate the potent fumes of the tobacco
were no less repugnant than the whiskey had been. Half strangled, he
plucked the cigar from his mouth and stamped on it.

"Oh," he cried wildly, "I'll be--I'll be damned!"

He paused, staring vacantly at nothing. "And even that doesn't do any
good! God help me, I've forgotten how to swear!"

To him, in this overwrought state, came Tracey, lumbering cheerfully
in, his mouth shaped for a whistle. At sight of Nat he pulled up as if
hit by a club.

"'Evenin', Mister Duncan. What's the matter?"

By an effort Nat brought his gaze to bear upon the boy and comprehended
his existence.

"Ain't you feeling well, Mr. Duncan?"

"No--rotten!"

"What's the matter?"

"_Nothing_!" Nat shouted ferociously.

"Anything I kin----"

"_No_!"

At that instant Kellogg appeared. "Hello, Nat! What's been keeping you?
I came down to bring you home to supper."

"Go to blazes with your supper! Keep away from me! Don't talk to me! I
don't want anything to do with you, d'you understand? You and your
confounded systems have got me into all this----"

He caught sight of his hat abruptly, ceased talking, grabbed the hat
and jammed it on his head, muttering; then started on a run for the
door.

"But what's the matter?" demanded Kellogg, thunderstruck. "Here! Hold
on! Where are you going?"

"To the only place I can get any consolation--church!"




XXII


ROLAND'S TRIUMPH

But at the doorstep of the Methodist Church Nat hesitated. The building
was dimly lighted, for it was choir practise night, and the door was
ajar; but he couldn't bring himself to enter. He would not long have
peace and quiet in which to think, there; presently would come Angle
and Josie and Roland and...

"I couldn't stand it; I'd probably murder Roland....

"Besides, I've no right there--an impostor--a contemptible low-lived
pup like me!...

"Why the thunderation did I ever allow myself to be persuaded to come
here? Why was I ever such a fool?...

"How _could_ I be such a fool?..."

He was walking, now, striding swiftly through the silent village
streets, meeting few wayfarers and paying them no heed, whether they
knew and greeted him or not. His entire consciousness was obsessed by
regret, repentance and remorse. He had ruined everything, deceived
everybody--even himself for a time--played the cad and the bounder with
consummate address. There were no bounds to the contempt he felt for
the man who had tricked these simple, kindly folk into believing him
immaculate, impeccable; who had hoodwinked "that old prince, Graham,"
and under false pretences gained his confidence and affection; who had
deliberately set out to snare an innocent and trusting girl for the
sake of the filthy money her father owned; who had made another and a
better girl love him, though that he had done so unconsciously, only to
break her heart; who had sacrificed everything, honour and decency and
self-respect, to his greed for money.

But it should go no further. He'd given what he called his word of
honour to a despicable compact; there could be no dishonour so great as
holding by that word, sticking to his bargain, maintaining the
deception and--ruining the life of one woman--perhaps two: Josie
Lockwood's, for he could never love her; and possibly Betty Graham's,
for she was of that sort that loves once and once only. If she truly
loved him...

But by his own act he had placed himself forever beyond the joy of her
love. He could never accept it, desire it as passionately as he
might--and did. He could never consent to drag her down to his base
level...

To-morrow--no, to-night, that very night, he would unmask himself,
declare his character to them all, pillory himself that all might see
how low a man could fall. And to-morrow he would go, leave Radville,
lose himself to all that had come to be so dear to him, forever....

So, raving and ranting with the extravagance of youth, he passed
through the village, out into the open country, and in the course of an
hour and a half, back--all blindly: circling back to the store, in the
course of his wanderings, as instinctly as a carrier pigeon shapes its
course for home.

It was with incredulity that he found himself again in that cheerful,
cherished, homely place. But there he was when he came out of his
abstraction: there in those familiar surroundings, with Tracey's round
red face beaming at him over the cigar-stand like a lively counterfeit
of the round red moon he had watched lift up into the skies, back there
in the still countryside, just as he paused to turn back to town.

He recollected his faculties and resumed command of himself
sufficiently to acknowledge Tracey's greeting with a moody word.

"All right, Tracey," he said abruptly. "You may go, now. I'll shut up
the store."

He looked at his watch, and was surprised to discover that it was no
later than half-past eight. He seemed to have lived a lifetime in the
last few hours.


"Thank you, sir," said Tracey with a gush of gratitude. "I'll be glad
to get off. Angle's waiting."

"Angle----?"

"Good-evening, Mr. Duncan."

"Oh, Miss Tuthill!" Nat discovered that little rogue, all smiles and
dimples and blushes, not distant from his elbow. "I didn't see you--I
was thinking."

"Guess we know what you was thinkin' about," observed Tracey, bringing
his hat round the counter. "Everybody in town's talkin' about it."

"About what?"

"Ah, you know about what, and we're mighty glad of it, and we want to
congratulate you, don't we, Angie."

"Oh, yes, indeed, Mr. Duncan. It's just too sweet for anything."

"O Lord!" groaned Nat.

"I'm awful glad you done it when you did," pursued Tracey, oblivious to
Nat in his own ecstatic temper. "I guess I wouldn't never 've got up
the spunk to--to tell Angie what I did to-night, 'f it hadn't been we
was talkin' 'bout your engagement to Josie. Then, somehow, it just
seemed to bust right out of me, like I couldn't hold it no longer.
Didn't it, Angie?"

"Oh, Tracey, how can you talk so!"

"Then you're engaged, too?" Nat inquired, rousing himself a little and
smiling feebly upon them.

"Yes, sir."

"I'm glad to hear it. It's great news. Now run along, both of you, and
don't forget you'll never be so happy again." With what he thought an
expiring flash of humour he raised his hands above their heads. "Bless
you, my children!" he said solemnly. "Now, for Heaven's sake, beat it!"

Alone he went to the prescription desk and opening one of the drawers
took out the firm's books. After that for some fifteen minutes there
was nothing to be heard in the store save Nat's breathing and the
scratching of his pen as he figured out a trial balance....

Brisk footfalls disturbed him. He sighed and moved out into the store
to find Kellogg there, suave and easy as always, yet with that in his
manner, perceptible perhaps only to a friend of long-standing like Nat,
to betray a mind far from complacent.

"Oh, you're here!" he cried, with a distinct start of relief. "I've
been looking all over for you."

"I just got in." Nat brushed aside explanations curtly, intent upon his
purpose. "Harry, I've got something to say to you: I'm not going
through with this thing."

"You're not?"

"No; and that's final. I was just on the point of drawing you a cheque
for three-hundred; that's all my share of the profits of this concern,
so far; and my note for the balance. I'll pay that up as soon as I'm
able--and I'll work like a terrier until I do. But as for the rest of
it, I'm through."

"Oh, you are?" Kellogg took a chair and tipped back, frowning gravely.
"But what about your word to me?"

"Damn that," said Duncan without heat. "The word of honour of a man
who'd stoop to a trick as vile as I have doesn't amount to a
continental shinplaster. I'll rather be dishonoured by breaking it than
by ruining a woman's life."

"Very well, if you feel that way about it," said Kellogg as coolly.
"And you may keep your cheque and note: I wouldn't take them. You can
pay me back when it's convenient--I don't care when. But what I want to
know is what you mean to do?"

"I mean to do the only thing left to do. I'm going to shut up here and
then see Lockwood and Josie and tell them the whole story."

"Hm," Kellogg reflected, quizzical. "You've got a pleasant little job
ahead of you."

"I don't care about that: I deserve all that's coming to me. I owe
Josie a duty. Why, it's awful, Harry, to trick a girl into caring for
you and then to--to----"

"Break her heart?" Kellogg's tone was sardonic.

"That's what I meant."

"Don't flatter yourself, my boy. Josie Lockwood doesn't love you; she
just set herself to win you because you're the best chance she's seen."
Kellogg laughed quietly. "The system would have worked just as well if
anyone else had tried it."

"Do you think so--honest?" Nat's eagerness to believe him was
undisguised.

"I'm sure of it. The trouble is that people will say you've thrown her
over--there isn't anyone in Radville who hasn't heard the news by this
time; and that's going to make the girl feel pretty cheap. But only for
a while: she'll get over it and solace herself with the next best
thing.... And don't forget; you lose a fortune."

"No, I don't," Duncan disclaimed. "I never had it and now I don't want
it."

"That's true enough," Kellogg admitted evenly. "And I hope you'll
always feel that way about it; but, believe me, you'll find plenty of
money a great help if you want to live a happy life."

"There are better things than money to make a man happy; I'll pass up
the money and try for the others."

"That's true, too; but when did you find it out?"

"Here--this last year.... You know I had everything my heart desired
until the governor cashed in; and I used to think I was a pretty happy
kid in those days. But now I've learned that you can beat that kind of
happiness to death. Harry"--Duncan was growing almost sententious--"the
real way to be happy is to work and have your work amount to something
and--and to have someone who believes in you to work for."

"Is this a sermon, Nat?"

"Call it what you like: it goes, just the same. ... That's what I've
found out this year."

Kellogg let his chair fall forward and rose, imprisoning Nat's
shoulders with two heavy but kindly hands. "And you're right!" he cried
heartily. "I'm glad you had the backbone to back out, Nat. It was a
low-down trick and I'm ashamed of myself for proposing it. I did it, I
presume, simply because I'm a schemer at heart, and I knew it would
work. It did work, but it's worked a finer way than I dreamed of: it's
made a man of you, Nat, and I'm mightly glad and proud of you!"

Nat swayed with amazement. "What's changed you all of a sudden?" he
demanded blankly.

Releasing him, Kellogg resumed his seat, laughing. "Well, a number of
things. Among others, I've talked with Graham and I've met his
daughter."

"Oh-h!"

"And that reminds me," Kellogg changed the subject briskly; "I
understood from you that Graham was sole owner of that patent burner."

"So he is."

"He says not. I had a proposition to make him from the Mutual people,
and he referred me to you, saying that you controlled the matter."

"I've not the slightest interest in it!" Nat protested.

"I know you haven't, but Graham insisted you owned the whole thing. I
pressed him for an explanation, and he finally furnished one in his
rambling, inconsequent, fine old way. He admitted that there wasn't any
sort of an existing contract or agreement of any sort, even oral,
between you, but just the same you'd been so good to him and his girl
that he'd made up his mind--some time ago, I gather--to make you a
present of the burner; but naturally he forgot to tell you about an
insignificant detail like that."

"Of course that's nonsense; I wouldn't and shant accept."

"Of course you won't. I did you the honour to discount that. But he
wouldn't say a word about the offer--yes or no--just left it all up to
you. He says you're a business man, and that he's often thought what a
help you must have been to me before you left New York."

Nat laughed outright. "Can you beat that? ... But what is the offer?"

"Fifty thousand cash and ten thousand shares of preferred
stock--hundred dollars par."

"What's that worth?"

"At the market rate when I left town, seventy-eight." Kellogg waited a
moment. "Well, what do you say?"

"Say? Great Caesar's Ghost! What is there to say? Wire 'em an
acceptance before they get their second wind.... You don't know how
good this makes me feel, Harry; I can't thank you enough for what
you've done. This'll square me with Graham to some extent, and I can
clear out----"

"No, you can't, Mr. Smarty! You ain't been 'cute enough."

Both men, startled by the interruption, wheeled round to discover
Roland Barnette dancing with excitement in the doorway, the while he
beckoned frantically to an invisible party without. "Come on!" he
shouted. "Here he is!"

"What's eating you, Roly-Poly?" inquired

Nat, too happy for the money to cherish animosity even toward his
one-time rival.

"You'll find out soon enough," snarled Roland. "Mr. Lockwood's got
something to say to you, I guess."

And on the heels of this announcement Lockwood strode into the store,
Josie clinging to his arm, Pete Willing--a trifle more sanely drunk
than he had been some hours previous--bringing up the rear.

"So!" snarled Blinky, halting and transfixing Nat with the stare of his
cold blue eyes. "So we've found you, eh?"

"Oh? I didn't know I was lost."

"No nonsense, young man. I ain't in the humour for foolin'." Blinky was
unquestionably in no sort of a humour at all beyond an evil one. "I
come here to have a word with you."

"Well, sir?" Nat's tone and attitude were perfectly pacific.

"Ah, there ain't no use beatin' 'round the bush. You've behaved
yourself ever since you come to Radville, and insinooated yourself into
our confidence, 'spite of the fact that nobody in town knows who you
were before you came. But now Roland's laid a charge again' you, and I
want to know the rights to it."

"Well," Roland interposed cockily, "I accused him of it to-night and he
didn't deny it."

[Illustration: "You're a thief with a reward out for you!"]

"What's more," Lockwood continued with rising colour, "Roland says he
can prove it?"

"Prove what?" Nat insisted. "Get down to facts, can't you?"

"That you're a thief with a reward out for you," said Roland. "You're
that Mortimer Henry what absconded from the Longacre National Bank in
Noo York."

There fell a brief pause. Nat bowed his head and tugged at his
moustache, his shoulders shaking with emotion variously construed by
those who watched him. Presently he looked up again, his features
gravely composed.

"Roly," said he, "Balaam must miss you terribly."

"That ain't no answer." Lockwood put himself solidly between Nat and
the object of his obscure remark--who was painfully digesting it. "I
want to know about this. You got my daughter to say she'd marry you
this evenin', and you've got to explain to me about this bank business
before it goes any further."

"Yes?" commented Nat civilly.

"Yes!" thundered Blinky. "Do you deny it? ... Answer me."

To Kellogg's huge diversion, Nat struck an attitude, "I refuse to
answer," said he.

"Aha! What'd I tell you?" This was Roland's triumphant crow.

"Nat!" Josie advanced, trembling with excitement. "Tell me, what does
this mean?"

Duncan perforce avoided her gaze. "Don't ask," he said sadly.

"Is it true?" she insisted.

"You heard what Roly said," he replied, with a chastened expression.

"Then you admit it?"

"I admit nothing."

"Oh-h!" The girl drew away from him as from defilement. "I--I hate
you!" she cried in a voice of loathing

"That's all right," he told her serenely; "I've despised myself all
evening."

The girl showed him a scornful back. "Papa----" she began.

"Don't thank me, Josie. Roland done it all: he got onto him." Lockwood
continued to watch Duncan with the air of a cat eyeing a mouse.

Impulsively Josie moved to Roland's side and caught his arm. He drew
himself up proudly.

"I do thank you, Roland; I can never be grateful enough. I've been so
foolish.

"That's all right." Roland tucked the girl's hand beneath his arm and
patted it down. "You wasn't to blame. I never seen anyone from Noo York
yet that wasn't a crook."

"Won't you please take me away from this--place, Roland?" she appealed.

"I'll be mighty glad to see you home, Josie," he assured her
generously, turning.

In the act of leaving, Josie caught Nat's eye. She hung back for an
instant, withering him with a glare. "Oh-h!" she cried. "How did you
dare pretend to care for me?"

He bowed politely. "It was one of the rules, Josie."

"There's no need to tell you, I guess, that the engagement is broken."

"None whatever, Miss Lockwood. Good-evening."

"Come, Roland!"

Arm in arm they left, with the haughty tread of the elect, while Pete
Willing lurched to Duncan's side and caught his arm.

"Come 'long to jail, Mish'r Duncan," he said with sympathy. "Mush
bessher."

"You look after him, Pete." Lockwood turned to leave with a final shot
for Duncan. "I'll 'tend to your case in the mornin', young man, and
I'll make you wish you never came to this town."

"You needn't trouble. I feel that way about it already. _Good_-night."

Lockwood left them, snarling. Nat caught Kellogg's eye and began to
giggle. But Pete was still holding him fast, partially, beyond doubt,
for support.

"You've been saved just in time, Mish'r Duncan," he commented; "y'are
mighty lucky man. Now lissen: you better make tracks. I ain't got no
warrant to hold you, 'nd I wouldn't if I had."

"You're a good fellow, Pete; but you needn't worry. I'm not the man
they think me, and it'll be easy to prove."

"Wal," said Pete, "jus' the same, you better git out, 'r you may have
to marry her aft'all."

"No, I won't."

"Thank Gawd f'r that!" Pete exclaimed in maudlin gratitude. He swung
widely toward the door, and by a miracle found it. "G'night, Mish'r
Duncan. I feel s' good 'bout thish I'm goin' try goin' home 'nd face m'
wife. G'night."

"Good-night, Pete."

"Well!" said Kellogg after a pause, "that was a bit of luck!"

"Luck!" Nat seized his hat and began to turn off the lights. "It's more
luck than I thought there was in the whole world. Come along."

"Where are you going?"

"First, to see Lockwood and have it out with him."

"No, you aren't," Kellogg laughed as Nat locked the door. "You're going
to leave Lockwood to me; I'll manage to ease his mind. You've got
infinitely more important matters to attend to--and the sooner you find
her, the better, Nat!"




XXIII


THE RAINBOW'S END

The air was heavy with moisture and very still and warm; a heady
fragrance of precocious blooms flavoured the air, vying with the scent
of rain. The silence was profound, but shaken now and then by a grumble
of distant thunder. The world hung breathless on the issue of the night.

Since evenfall a wall of cloud, massive and portentous, had been
climbing up over the western hills, slowly but with ominous steadiness
obscuring the moon-swept sky with its far, pale wreaths of stars,
blotting it out with monstrous folds and convolutions of impenetrable
purple-black. Along its crest fire played like swords in the sunlight,
and now and again sheeted flame lightened the monstrous expanse so that
it glowed with the pale phosphorescence of a summer sea.

As Duncan hurried homeward over sidewalks chequered in silver and ink,
the advance of the cloud army seemed to become accelerated. With
increasing frequency gusts of air set the trees a-shiver until their
sibilant whispers of warning filled the valley. The rolling of the
thunder grew more sharp, more instant upon the flashes.... When there
was no wind the air seemed to quiver with terror--as a dog cringes to
the whip....

But of this Duncan was barely conscious.

He gained the gate in the fence of wood paling, opened it, and entered.
The lawn and house were lit with the unearthly radiance of moonlight
threatened by eclipse. He could see the light in Graham's study and,
through the open doors, the faint glow of the hall-lamp. But there was
no one visible.

He hurried up the path, tortured by impatience, fear, longing,
despair....

Then he saw what seemed at first a pale shadow detach itself from
darker shades in the shrubbery and move toward him.

"Nat, is it you?"

"Betty!"

His whole heart was in that cry; the girl thrilled to its timbre as
though a master hand had struck a chord upon her heart-strings.

"Nat, what--what is it?"

"Betty, I want to tell you something."

She came very slowly toward him, torn alternately by fear and hope.
What did he mean?

"Do you happen to remember that I told you a while ago I was engaged to
Josie Lockwood?"

[Illustration: "Forever and ever and a day"]

"Nat! Could I forget? ... Why?"

"Because ... it's broken off, Betty."

"Broken off! ... How? Why?"

"Because it had to be, sweetheart: because I love you."

She was very close to him then. Her uplifted face shone like marble in
the fading light. "Nat, I ... I don't understand."

"Then, listen--I must tell you. It was all a plan, a scheme, my coming
here, Betty. Everything I did, said, thought, was part of a
contemptible trick.... I meant to marry Josie Lockwood, whom I'd never
seen, for her money. ... Now you know what I was, dear.... But it's
different, now. I'm not the same man who came to Radville ten months
ago. I've learned a little to understand the right, I hope: I've
learned to love and reverence goodness and purity and unselfishness and
... And I want to be a man, the kind of a man you thought me: a man
worthy of you and your love, Betty.... Because I love you. I want you
to be my wife. ... And, O Betty, Betty, I need you to help me!"

His voice broke. He waited, every nerve and fibre of him tense for her
answer. While he had been speaking, the onrush of the storm had blotted
out the moon. There was only darkness there in the garden--deep, dense
darkness, so thick he could not even see the shimmer of her dress....

Then suddenly she was in his arms, shaking and sobbing, straining him
to her.

"Oh, Nat, my Nat! I've loved you from the first day I ever saw you! You
know I have."
 "Betty! ... sweetheart..."

There came an abrupt, furious patter of heavy drops of water, beating
upon the foliage, splashing and rebounding from the house.

"Forever and ever, Nat?"

"Forever and ever and a day, my dear ... my dear!"










End of Project Gutenberg's The Fortune Hunter, by Louis Joseph Vance

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FORTUNE HUNTER ***

***** This file should be named 9747.txt or 9747.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/7/4/9747/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Anuradha Valsa Raj, Tonya Allen
and PG Distributed Proofreaders


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
