Project Gutenberg EBook, Alice, or The Mysteries, by Lytton, Book V
#207 in our series by Edward Bulwer Lytton

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****



Title: Alice, or The Mysteries, Book V

Author: Edward Bulwer Lytton

Release Date: January 2006  [EBook #9767]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on October 15, 2003]


Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII




*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, ALICE, BY LYTTON, BOOK V ***





Produced by Dagny; and by David Widger



Corrected and updated text and HTML PG Editions of the complete
11 volume set may be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.org/files/9774/9774.txt

http://www.gutenberg.org/files/9774/9774-h/9774-h.htm





BOOK V.

  "FOOLS blind to truth; nor know their erring soul
   How much the half is better than the whole."
        --HESIOD: _Op. et Dies_, 40.



CHAPTER I.

  Do as the Heavens have done; forget your evil;
  With them, forgive yourself.--_The Winter's Tale_.

  .  .  .  The sweet'st companion that e'er man
  Bred his hopes out of.--_Ibid._

THE curate of Brook-Green was sitting outside his door.  The vicarage
which he inhabited was a straggling, irregular, but picturesque
building,--humble enough to suit the means of the curate, yet large
enough to accommodate the vicar.  It had been built in an age when the
_indigentes et pauperes_ for whom universities were founded supplied,
more than they do now, the fountains of the Christian ministry, when
pastor and flock were more on an equality.

From under a rude and arched porch, with an oaken settle on either side
for the poor visitor, the door opened at once upon the old-fashioned
parlour,--a homely but pleasant room, with one wide but low cottage
casement, beneath which stood the dark shining table that supported the
large Bible in its green baize cover; the Concordance, and the last
Sunday's sermon, in its jetty case.  There by the fireplace stood the
bachelor's round elbow-chair, with a needlework cushion at the back; a
walnut-tree bureau, another table or two, half a dozen plain chairs,
constituted the rest of the furniture, saving some two or three hundred
volumes, ranged in neat shelves on the clean wainscoted walls.  There was
another room, to which you ascended by two steps, communicating with this
parlour, smaller but finer, and inhabited only on festive days, when Lady
Vargrave, or some other quiet neighbour, came to drink tea with the good
curate.

An old housekeeper and her grandson--a young fellow of about two and
twenty, who tended the garden, milked the cow, and did in fact what he
was wanted to do--composed the establishment of the humble minister.

We have digressed from Mr. Aubrey himself.

The curate was seated, then, one fine summer morning, on a bench at the
left of his porch, screened from the sun by the cool boughs of a
chestnut-tree, the shadow of which half covered the little lawn that
separated the precincts of the house from those of silent Death and
everlasting Hope; above the irregular and moss-grown paling rose the
village church; and, through openings in the trees, beyond the
burial-ground, partially gleamed the white walls of Lady Vargrave's
cottage, and were seen at a distance the sails on the--

          "Mighty waters, rolling evermore."

The old man was calmly enjoying the beauty of the morning, the freshness
of the air, the warmth of the dancing beam, and not least, perhaps, his
own peaceful thoughts,--the spontaneous children of a contemplative
spirit and a quiet conscience.  His was the age when we most sensitively
enjoy the mere sense of existence,--when the face of Nature and a passive
conviction of the benevolence of our Great Father suffice to create a
serene and ineffable happiness, which rarely visits us till we have done
with the passions; till memories, if more alive than heretofore, are yet
mellowed in the hues of time, and Faith softens into harmony all their
asperities and harshness; till nothing within us remains to cast a shadow
over the things without; and on the verge of life, the Angels are nearer
to us than of yore.  There is an old age which has more youth of heart
than youth itself!

As the old man thus sat, the little gate through which, on Sabbath days,
he was wont to pass from the humble mansion to the house of God
noiselessly opened, and Lady Vargrave appeared.

The curate rose when he perceived her; and the lady's fair features were
lighted up with a gentle pleasure, as she pressed his hand and returned
his salutation.

There was a peculiarity in Lady Vargrave's countenance which I have
rarely seen in others.  Her smile, which was singularly expressive, came
less from the lip than from the eyes; it was almost as if the brow
smiled; it was as the sudden and momentary vanishing of a light but
melancholy cloud that usually rested upon the features, placid as they
were.

They sat down on the rustic bench, and the sea-breeze wantoned amongst
the quivering leaves of the chestnut-tree that overhung their seat.

"I have come, as usual, to consult my kind friend," said Lady Vargrave;
"and, as usual also, it is about our absent Evelyn."

"Have you heard again from her, this morning?"

"Yes; and her letter increases the anxiety which your observation, so
much deeper than mine, first awakened."

"Does she then write much of Lord Vargrave?"

"Not a great deal; but the little she does say, betrays how much she
shrinks from the union my poor husband desired: more, indeed, than ever!
But this is not all, nor the worst; for you know that the late lord had
provided against that probability--he loved her so tenderly, his ambition
for her only came from his affection; and the letter he left behind him
pardons and releases her, if she revolts from the choice he himself
preferred."

"Lord Vargrave is, perhaps, a generous, he certainly seems a candid, man,
and he must be sensible that his uncle has already done all that justice
required."

"I think so.  But this, as I said, is not all; I have brought the letter
to show you.  It seems to me as you apprehended.  This Mr. Maltravers has
wound himself about her thoughts more than she herself imagines; you see
how she dwells on all that concerns him, and how, after checking herself,
she returns again and again to the same subject."

The curate put on his spectacles, and took the letter.  It was a strange
thing, that old gray-haired minister evincing such grave interest in the
secrets of that young heart!  But they who would take charge of the soul
must never be too wise to regard the heart!

Lady Vargrave looked over his shoulder as he bent down to read, and at
times placed her finger on such passages as she wished him to note.  The
old curate nodded as she did so; but neither spoke till the letter was
concluded.

The curate then folded up the epistle, took off his spectacles, hemmed,
and looked grave.

"Well," said Lady Vargrave, anxiously, "well?"

"My dear friend, the letter requires consideration.  In the first place,
it is clear to me that, in spite of Lord Vargrave's presence at the
rectory, his lordship so manages matters that the poor child is unable of
herself to bring that matter to a conclusion.  And, indeed, to a mind so
sensitively delicate and honourable, it is no easy task."

"Shall I write to Lord Vargrave?"

"Let us think of it.  In the meanwhile, this Mr. Maltravers--"

"Ah, this Mr. Maltravers!"

"The child shows us more of her heart than she thinks of; and yet I
myself am puzzled.  If you observe, she has only once or twice spoken of
the Colonel Legard whom she has made acquaintance with; while she treats
at length of Mr. Maltravers, and confesses the effect he has produced on
her mind.  Yet, do you know, I more dread the caution respecting the
first than all the candour that betrays the influence of the last?  There
is a great difference between first fancy and first love."

"Is there?" said the lady, abstractedly.

"Again, neither of us is acquainted with this singular man,--I mean
Maltravers; his character, temper, and principles, of all of which Evelyn
is too young, too guileless, to judge for herself.  One thing, however,
in her letter speaks in his favour."

"What is that?"

"He absents himself from her.  This, if he has discovered her secret, or
if he himself is sensible of too great a charm in her presence, would be
the natural course that an honourable and a strong mind would pursue."

"What!--if he love her?"

"Yes; while he believes her hand is engaged to another."

"True!  What shall be done--if Evelyn should love, and love in vain?  Ah,
it is the misery of a whole existence!"

"Perhaps she had better return to us," said Mr. Aubrey; "and yet, if
already it be too late, and her affections are engaged, we should still
remain in ignorance respecting the motives and mind of the object of her
attachment; and he, too, might not know the true nature of the obstacle
connected with Lord Vargrave's claims."

"Shall I, then, go to her?  You know how I shrink from strangers; how I
fear curiosity, doubts, and questions; how [and Lady Vargrave's voice
faltered]--how unfitted I am for--for--" she stopped short, and a faint
blush overspread her cheeks.

The curate understood her, and was moved.

"Dear friend," said he, "will you intrust this charge to myself?  You
know how Evelyn is endeared to me by certain recollections!  Perhaps,
better than you, I may be enabled silently to examine if this man be
worthy of her, and one who could secure her happiness; perhaps, better
than you I may ascertain the exact nature of her own feelings towards
him; perhaps, too, better than you I may effect an understanding with
Lord Vargrave."

"You are always my kindest friend," said the lady, with emotion; "how
much I already owe you! what hopes beyond the grave! what--"

"Hush!" interrupted the curate, gently; "your own good heart and pure
intentions have worked out your own atonement--may I hope also your own
content?  Let us return to our Evelyn.  Poor child! how unlike this
despondent letter to her gay light spirits when with us!  We acted for
the best; yet perhaps we did wrong to yield her up to strangers.  And
this Maltravers--with her enthusiasm and quick susceptibilities to
genius, she was half prepared to imagine him all she depicts him to be.
He must have a spell in his works that I have not discovered, for at
times it seems to operate even on you."

"Because," said Lady Vargrave, "they remind me of _his_ conversation,
_his_ habits of thought.  If like _him_ in other things, Evelyn may
indeed be happy!"

"And if," said the curate, curiously,--"if now that you are free, you
were ever to meet with him again, and his memory had been as faithful as
yours; and if he offered the sole atonement in his power, for all that
his early error cost you; if such a chance should happen in the
vicissitudes of life, you would--"

The curate stopped short; for he was struck by the exceeding paleness of
his friend's cheek, and the tremor of her delicate frame.

"If that were to happen," said she, in a very low voice; "if we were to
meet again, and if he were--as you and Mrs. Leslie seem to think--poor,
and, like myself, humbly born, if my fortune could assist him, if my love
could still--changed, altered as I am--ah! do not talk of it--I cannot
bear the thought of happiness!  And yet, if before I die I _could_ but
see him again!"  She clasped her hands fervently as she spoke, and the
blush that overspread her face threw over it so much of bloom and
freshness, that even Evelyn, at that moment, would scarcely have seemed
more young.  "Enough!" she added, after a little while, as the glow died
away.  "It is but a foolish hope; all earthly love is buried; and my
heart is there!"--she pointed to the heavens, and both were silent.



CHAPTER II.

  QUIBUS otio vel magnifice, vel molliter, vivere copia era
  incerta pro certis malebant.*--SALLUST.

  * "They who had the means to live at ease, either in splendour or
    in luxury, preferred the uncertainty of change to their natural
    security."

LORD RABY--one of the wealthiest and most splendid noblemen in
England--was prouder, perhaps, of his provincial distinctions than the
eminence of his rank or the fashion of his wife.  The magnificent
chateaux, the immense estates, of our English peers tend to preserve to
us in spite of the freedom, bustle, and commercial grandeur of our people
more of the Norman attributes of aristocracy than can be found in other
countries.  In his county, the great noble is a petty prince; his house
is a court; his possessions and munificence are a boast to every
proprietor in his district.  They are as fond of talking of _the_ earl's
or _the_ duke's movements and entertainments, as Dangeau was of the
gossip of the Tuileries and Versailles.

Lord Raby, while affecting, as lieutenant of the county, to make no
political distinctions between squire and squire--hospitable and affable
to all--still, by that very absence of exclusiveness, gave a tone to the
politics of the whole county; and converted many who had once thought
differently on the respective virtues of Whigs and Tories.  A great man
never loses so much as when he exhibits intolerance, or parades the right
of persecution.

"My tenants shall vote exactly as they please," said Lord Raby; and he
was never known to have a tenant vote against his wishes!  Keeping a
vigilant eye on all the interests, and conciliating all the proprietors,
in the county, he not only never lost a friend, but he kept together a
body of partisans that constantly added to its numbers.

Sir John Merton's colleague, a young Lord Nelthorpe, who could not speak
three sentences if you took away his hat, and who, constant at Almack's,
was not only inaudible but invisible in parliament, had no chance of
being re-elected.  Lord Nelthorpe's father, the Earl of Mainwaring, was a
new peer; and, next to Lord Raby, the richest nobleman in the county.
Now, though they were much of the same politics, Lord Raby hated Lord
Mainwaring.  They were too near each other,--they clashed; they had the
jealousy of rival princes!

Lord Raby was delighted at the notion of getting rid of Lord
Nelthorpe,--it would be so sensible a blow to the Mainwaring interest.
The party had been looking out for a new candidate, and Maltravers had
been much talked of.  It is true that, when in parliament some years
before, the politics of Maltravers had differed from those of Lord Raby
and his set.  But Maltravers had of late taken no share in politics, had
uttered no political opinions, was intimate with the electioneering
Mertons, was supposed to be a discontented man,--and politicians believe
in no discontent that is not political.  Whispers were afloat that
Maltravers had grown wise, and changed his views: some remarks of his,
more theoretical than practical, were quoted in favour of this notion.
Parties, too, had much changed since Maltravers had appeared on the busy
scene,--new questions had arisen, and the old ones had died off.

Lord Raby and his party thought that, if Maltravers could be secured to
them, no one would better suit their purpose.  Political faction loves
converts better even than consistent adherents.  A man's rise in life
generally dates from a well-timed _rat_.  His high reputation, his
provincial rank as the representative of the oldest commoner's family in
the county, his age, which combined the energy of one period with the
experience of another,--all united to accord Maltravers a preference over
richer men.  Lord Raby had been pointedly courteous and flattering to the
master of Burleigh; and he now contrived it so, that the brilliant
entertainment he was about to give might appear in compliment to a
distinguished neighbour, returned to fix his residence on his patrimonial
property, while in reality it might serve an electioneering
purpose,--serve to introduce Maltravers to the county, as if under his
lordship's own wing, and minister to political uses that went beyond the
mere representation of the county.

Lord Vargrave had, during his stay at Merton Rectory, paid several visits
to Knaresdean, and held many private conversations with the marquess: the
result of these conversations was a close union of schemes and interests
between the two noblemen.  Dissatisfied with the political conduct of
government, Lord Raby was also dissatisfied that, from various party
reasons, a nobleman beneath himself in rank, and as he thought in
influence, had obtained a preference in a recent vacancy among the
Knights of the Garter.  And if Vargrave had a talent in the world it was
in discovering the weak points of men whom he sought to gain, and making
the vanities of others conduce to his own ambition.

The festivities of Knaresdean gave occasion to Lord Raby to unite at his
house the more prominent of those who thought and acted in concert with
Lord Vargrave; and in this secret senate the operations for the following
session were to be seriously discussed and gravely determined.

On the day which was to be concluded with the ball at Knaresdean, Lord
Vargrave went before the rest of the Merton party, for he was engaged to
dine with the marquess.

On arriving at Knaresdean, Lumley found Lord Saxingham and some other
politicians, who had arrived the preceding day, closeted with Lord Raby;
and Vargrave, who shone to yet greater advantage in the diplomacy of
party management than in the arena of parliament, brought penetration,
energy, and decision to timid and fluctuating counsels.  Lord Vargrave
lingered in the room after the first bell had summoned the other guests
to depart.

"My dear lord," said he then, "though no one would be more glad than
myself to secure Maltravers to our side, I very much doubt whether you
will succeed in doing so.  On the one hand, he appears altogether
disgusted with politics and parliament; and on the other hand, I fancy
that reports of his change of opinions are, if not wholly unfounded, very
unduly coloured.  Moreover, to do him justice, I think that he is not one
to be blinded and flattered into the pale of a party; and your bird will
fly away after you have wasted a bucketful of salt on his tail."

"Very possibly," said Lord Raby, laughing,--"you know him better than I
do.  But there are many purposes to serve in this matter,--purposes too
provincial to interest you.  In the first place, we shall humble the
Nelthorpe interest, merely by showing that we _do_ think of a new member;
secondly, we shall get up a manifestation of feeling that would be
impossible, unless we were provided with a centre of attraction; thirdly,
we shall rouse a certain emulation among other county gentlemen, and if
Maltravers decline, we shall have many applicants; and fourthly, suppose
Maltravers has not changed his opinions, we shall make him suspected by
the party he really does belong to, and which would be somewhat
formidable if he were to head them.  In fact, these are mere county
tactics that you can't be expected to understand."

"I see you are quite right: meanwhile you will at least have an
opportunity (though I say it, who should not say it) to present to the
county one of the prettiest young ladies that ever graced the halls of
Knaresdean."

"Ah, Miss Cameron!  I have heard much of her beauty: you are a lucky
fellow, Vargrave!  By the by, are we to say anything of the engagement?"

"Why, indeed, my dear lord, it is now so publicly known, that it would be
false delicacy to affect concealment."

"Very well; I understand."

"How long I have detained you--a thousand pardons!--I have but just time
to dress.  In four or five months I must remember to leave you a longer
time for your toilet."

"Me--how?"

"Oh, the Duke of ----- can't live long; and I always observe that when a
handsome man has the Garter, he takes a long time pulling up his
stockings."

"Ha, ha! you are so droll, Vargrave."

"Ha, ha!  I must be off."

"The more publicity is given to this arrangement, the more difficult for
Evelyn to shy at the leap," muttered Vargrave to himself as he closed the
door.  "Thus do I make all things useful to myself!"

The dinner party were assembled in the great drawing-room, when
Maltravers and Cleveland, also invited guests to the banquet, were
announced.  Lord Raby received the former with marked _empressement_; and
the stately marchioness honoured him with her most gracious smile.
Formal presentations to the rest of the guests were interchanged; and it
was not till the circle was fully gone through that Maltravers perceived,
seated by himself in a corner, to which he had shrunk on the entrance of
Maltravers, a gray-haired solitary man,--it was Lord Saxingham!  The last
time they had met was in the death-chamber of Florence; and the old man
forgot for the moment the anticipated dukedom, and the dreamed-of
premiership, and his heart flew back to the grave of his only child!
They saluted each other, and shook hands in silence.  And Vargrave--whose
eye was on them--Vargrave, whose arts had made that old man childless,
felt not a pang of remorse!  Living ever in the future, Vargrave almost
seemed to have lost his memory.  He knew not what regret was.  It is a
condition of life with men thoroughly worldly that they never look
behind!

The signal was given: in due order the party were marshalled into the
great hall,--a spacious and lofty chamber, which had received its last
alteration from the hand of Inigo Jones; though the massive ceiling, with
its antique and grotesque masques, betrayed a much earlier date, and
contrasted with the Corinthian pilasters that adorned the walls, and
supported the music-gallery, from which waved the flags of modern warfare
and its mimicries,--the eagle of Napoleon, a token of the services of
Lord Raby's brother (a distinguished cavalry officer in command at
Waterloo), in juxtaposition with a much gayer and more glittering banner,
emblematic of the martial fame of Lord Raby himself, as Colonel of the
B-----shire volunteers!

The music pealed from the gallery, the plate glittered on the board; the
ladies wore diamonds, and the gentlemen who had them wore stars.  It was
a very fine sight, that banquet!--such as became the festive day of a
lord-lieutenant whose ancestors had now defied, and now intermarried,
with royalty.  But there was very little talk, and no merriment.  People
at the top of the table drank wine with those at the bottom; and
gentlemen and ladies seated next to each other whispered languidly in
monosyllabic commune.  On one side, Maltravers was flanked by a Lady
Somebody Something, who was rather deaf, and very much frightened for
fear he should talk Greek; on the other side he was relieved by Sir John
Merton,--very civil, very pompous, and talking, at strictured intervals,
about county matters, in a measured intonation, savouring of the
House-of-Commons jerk at the end of the sentence.

As the dinner advanced to its close, Sir John became a little more
diffuse, though his voice sank into a whisper.

"I fear there will be a split in the Cabinet before parliament meets."

"Indeed!"

"Yes; Vargrave and the premier cannot pull together very long.  Clever
man, Vargrave! but he has not enough stake in the country for a leader!"

"All men have public character to stake; and if that be good, I suppose
no stake can be better?"

"Humph!--yes--very true; but still, when a man has land and money, his
opinions, in a country like this, very properly carry more weight with
them.  If Vargrave, for instance, had Lord Raby's property, no man could
be more fit for a leader,--a prime minister.  We might then be sure that
he would have no selfish interest to further: he would not play tricks
with his party--you understand?"

"Perfectly."

"I am not a party man, as you may remember; indeed, you and I have voted
alike on the same questions.  Measures, not men,--that is my maxim; but
still I don't like to see men placed above their proper stations."

"Maltravers, a glass of wine," said Lord Vargrave across the table.
"Will you join us, Sir John?"

Sir John bowed.

"Certainly," he resumed, "Vargrave is a pleasant man and a good speaker;
but still they say he is far from rich,--embarrassed, indeed.  However,
when he marries Miss Cameron it may make a great difference,--give him
more respectability; do you know what her fortune is--something immense?"

"Yes, I believe so; I don't know."

"My brother says that Vargrave is most amiable.  The young lady is very
handsome, almost too handsome for a wife--don't you think so?  Beauties
are all very well in a ballroom; but they are not calculated for domestic
life.  I am sure you agree with me.  I have heard, indeed, that Miss
Cameron is rather learned; but there is so much scandal in a country
neighbourhood,--people are so ill-natured.  I dare say she is not more
learned than other young ladies, poor girl!  What do you think?"

"Miss Cameron is--is very accomplished, I believe.  And so you think the
Government cannot stand?"

"I don't say that,--very far from it; but I fear there must be a change.
However, if the country gentlemen hold together, I do not doubt but what
we shall weather the storm.  The landed interest, Mr. Maltravers, is the
great stay of this country,--the sheet-anchor, I may say.  I suppose Lord
Vargrave, who seems, I must say, to have right notions on this head, will
invest Miss Cameron's fortune in land.  But though one may buy an estate,
one can't buy an old family, Mr. Maltravers!--you and I may be thankful
for that.  By the way, who was Miss Cameron's mother, Lady
Vargrave?--something low, I fear; nobody knows."

"I am not acquainted with Lady Vargrave; your sister-in-law speaks of her
most highly.  And the daughter in herself is a sufficient guarantee for
the virtues of the mother."

"Yes; and Vargrave on one side, at least, has himself nothing in the way
of family to boast of."

The ladies left the hall, the gentlemen re-seated themselves.  Lord Raby
made some remark on politics to Sir John Merton, and the whole round of
talkers immediately followed their leader.

"It is a thousand pities, Sir John," said Lord Raby, "that you have not a
colleague more worthy of you; Nelthorpe never attends a committee, does
he?"

"I cannot say that he is a very active member; but he is young, and we
must make allowances for him," said Sir John, discreetly; for he had no
desire to oust his colleague,--it was agreeable enough to be _the_
efficient member.

"In these times," said Lord Raby, loftily, "allowances are not to be made
for systematic neglect of duty; we shall have a stormy session; the
Opposition is no longer to be despised; perhaps a dissolution may be
nearer at hand than we think for.  As for Nelthorpe, he cannot come in
again."

"That I am quite sure of," said a fat country gentleman of great weight
in the county; "he not only was absent on the great Malt question, but he
never answered my letter respecting the Canal Company."

"Not answered your letter!" said Lord Raby, lifting up his hands and eyes
in amaze and horror.  "What conduct!  Ah, Mr. Maltravers, you are the man
for us!"

"Hear! hear!" cried the fat squire.

"Hear!" echoed Vargrave; and the approving sound went round the table.

Lord Raby rose.  "Gentlemen, fill your glasses; a health to our
distinguished neighbour!"

The company applauded; each in his turn smiled, nodded, and drank to
Maltravers, who, though taken by surprise, saw at once the course to
pursue.  He returned thanks simply and shortly; and without pointedly
noticing the allusion in which Lord Raby had indulged, remarked,
incidentally, that he had retired, certainly for some years--perhaps
forever--from political life.

Vargrave smiled significantly at Lord Raby, and hastened to lead the
conversation into party discussion.  Wrapped in his proud disdain of what
he considered the contests of factions for toys and shadows, Maltravers
remained silent; and the party soon broke up, and adjourned to the
ballroom.



CHAPTER III.

  LE plus grand defaut de la penetration n'est pas de n'aller
  point jusqu'au but,--c'est de la passer.*--LA ROCHEFOUCAULD.

  * "The greatest defect of penetration is not that of not going
    just up to the point,--'tis the passing it."

EVELYN had looked forward to the ball at Knaresdean with feelings deeper
than those which usually inflame the fancy of a girl proud of her dress
and confident of her beauty.  Whether or not she _loved_ Maltravers, in
the true acceptation of the word "love," it is certain that he had
acquired a most powerful command over her mind and imagination.  She felt
the warmest interest in his welfare, the most anxious desire for his
esteem, the deepest regret at the thought of their estrangement.  At
Knaresdean she should meet Maltravers,--in crowds, it is true; but still
she should meet him; she should see him towering superior above the herd;
she should hear him praised; she should mark him, the observed of all.
But there was another and a deeper source of joy within her.  A letter
had been that morning received from Aubrey, in which he had announced his
arrival for the next day.  The letter, though affectionate, was short.
Evelyn had been some months absent,--Lady Vargrave was anxious to make
arrangements for her return; but it was to be at her option whether she
would accompany the curate home.  Now, besides her delight at seeing once
more the dear old man, and hearing from his lips that her mother was well
and happy, Evelyn hailed in his arrival the means of extricating herself
from her position with Lord Vargrave.  She would confide in him her
increased repugnance to that union, he would confer with Lord Vargrave;
and then--and then--did there come once more the thought of Maltravers?
No!  I fear it was not Maltravers who called forth that smile and that
sigh!  Strange girl, you know not your own mind!--but few of us, at your
age, do.

In all the gayety of hope, in the pride of dress and half-conscious
loveliness, Evelyn went with a light step into Caroline's room.  Miss
Merton had already dismissed her woman, and was seated by her
writing-table, leaning her cheek thoughtfully on her hand.

"Is it time to go?" said she, looking up.  "Well, we shall put Papa, and
the coachman, and the horses, too, in excellent humour.  How well you
look!  Really, Evelyn, you are indeed beautiful!" and Caroline gazed with
honest but not unenvious admiration at the fairy form so rounded and yet
so delicate, and the face that seemed to blush at its own charms.

"I am sure I can return the flattery," said Evelyn, laughing bashfully.

"Oh, as for me, I am well enough in my way: and hereafter, I dare say, we
may be rival beauties.  I hope we shall remain good friends, and rule the
world with divided empire.  Do you not long for the stir, and excitement,
and ambition of London?---for ambition is open to us as to men!"

"No, indeed," replied Evelyn, smiling; "I could be ambitious, indeed; but
it would not be for myself, but for--"

"A husband, perhaps; well, you will have ample scope for such sympathy.
Lord Vargrave--"

"Lord Vargrave again?" and Evelyn's smile vanished, and she turned away.

"Ah," said Caroline, "I should have made Vargrave an excellent wife--pity
he does not think so!  As it is, I must set up for myself and become a
_maitresse femme_.  So you think I look well to-night?  I am glad of
it--Lord Doltimore is one who will be guided by what other people say."

"You are not serious about Lord Doltimore?"

"Most sadly serious."

"Impossible! you could not speak so if you loved him."

"Loved him! no! but I intend to marry him."

Evelyn was revolted, but still incredulous.

"And you, too, will marry one whom you do not love--'tis our fate--"

"Never!"

"We shall see."

Evelyn's heart was damped, and her spirits fell.

"Tell me now," said Caroline, pressing on the wrung withers, "do you not
think this excitement, partial and provincial though it be--the sense of
beauty, the hope of conquest, the consciousness of power--better than the
dull monotony of the Devonshire cottage?  Be honest--"

"No, no, indeed!" answered Evelyn, tearfully and passionately; "one hour
with my mother, one smile from her lips, were worth it all."

"And in your visions of marriage, you think then of nothing but roses and
doves,--love in a cottage!"

"Love _in a home_, no matter whether a palace or a cottage," returned
Evelyn.

"Home!" repeated Caroline, bitterly; "home,--home is the English synonym
for the French _ennui_.  But I hear Papa on the stairs."

A ballroom--what a scene of commonplace! how hackneyed in novels! how
trite in ordinary life! and yet ballrooms have a character and a
sentiment of their own, for all tempers and all ages.  Something in the
lights, the crowd, the music, conduces to stir up many of the thoughts
that belong to fancy and romance.  It is a melancholy scene to men after
a certain age.  It revives many of those lighter and more graceful images
connected with the wandering desires of youth,--shadows that crossed us,
and seemed love, but were not; having much of the grace and charm, but
none of the passion and the tragedy, of love.  So many of our earliest
and gentlest recollections are connected with those chalked floors, and
that music painfully gay, and those quiet nooks and corners, where the
talk that hovers about the heart and does not touch it has been held.
Apart and unsympathizing in that austerer wisdom which comes to us after
deep passions have been excited, we see form after form chasing the
butterflies that dazzle us no longer among the flowers that have evermore
lost their fragrance.

Somehow or other, it is one of the scenes that remind us most forcibly of
the loss of youth!  We are brought so closely in contact with the young
and with the short-lived pleasures that once pleased us, and have
forfeited all bloom.  Happy the man who turns from "the tinkling cymbal"
and "the gallery of pictures," and can think of some watchful eye and
some kind heart _at home_; but those who have no home--and they are a
numerous tribe--never feel lonelier hermits or sadder moralists than in
such a crowd.

Maltravers leaned abstractedly against the wall, and some such
reflections, perhaps, passed within, as the plumes waved and the diamonds
glittered around him.  Ever too proud to be vain, the _monstrari digito_
had not flattered even in the commencement of his career.  And now he
heeded not the eyes that sought his look, nor the admiring murmur of lips
anxious to be overheard.  Affluent, well-born, unmarried, and still in
the prime of life,--in the small circles of a province, Ernest Maltravers
would in himself have been an object of interest to the diplomacy of
mothers and daughters; and the false glare of reputation necessarily
deepened curiosity, and widened the range of speculators and observers.

Suddenly, however, a new object of attention excited new interest; new
whispers ran through the crowd, and these awakened Maltravers from his
revery.  He looked up, and beheld all eyes fixed upon one form!  His own
eyes encountered those of Evelyn Cameron!

It was the first time he had seen this beautiful young person in all the
_eclat_, pomp, and circumstance of her station, as the heiress of the
opulent Templeton,--the first time he had seen her the cynosure of
crowds, who, had her features been homely, would have admired the charms
of her fortune in her face.  And now, as radiant with youth, and the
flush of excitement on her soft cheek, she met his eye, he said to
himself: "And could I have wished one so new to the world to have united
her lot with a man for whom all that to her is delight has grown
wearisome and stale?  Could I have been justified in stealing her from
the admiration that, at her age and to her sex, has so sweet a flattery?
Or, on the other hand, could I have gone back to her years, and
sympathized with feelings that time has taught me to despise?  Better as
it is."

Influenced by these thoughts, the greeting of Maltravers disappointed and
saddened Evelyn, she knew not why; it was constrained and grave.

"Does not Miss Cameron look well?" whispered Mrs. Merton, on whose arm
the heiress leaned.  "You observe what a sensation she creates?"

Evelyn overheard, and blushed as she stole a glance at Maltravers.  There
was something mournful in the admiration which spoke in his deep earnest
eyes.

"Everywhere," said he, calmly, and in the same tone, "everywhere Miss
Cameron appears, she must outshine all others."  He turned to Evelyn, and
said with a smile, "You must learn to inure yourself to admiration; a
year or two hence, and you will not blush at your own gifts!"

"And you, too, contribute to spoil me!--fie!"

"Are you so easily spoiled?  If I meet you hereafter, you will think my
compliments cold to the common language of others."

"You do not know me,--perhaps you never will."

"I am contented with the fair pages I have already read."

"Where is Lady Raby?" asked Mrs. Merton.  "Oh, I see; Evelyn, my love, we
must present ourselves to our hostess."

The ladies moved on; and when Maltravers next caught a glance of Evelyn,
she was with Lady Raby, and Lord Vargrave also was by her side.

The whispers round him had grown louder.

"Very lovely indeed! so young, too! and she is really going to be married
to Lord Vargrave: so much older than she is,--quite a sacrifice!"

"Scarcely so.  He is so agreeable, and still handsome.  But are you sure
that the thing is settled?"

"Oh, yes.  Lord Raby himself told me so.  It will take place very soon."

"But do you know who her mother was?  I cannot make out."

"Nothing particular.  You know the late Lord Vargrave was a man of low
birth.  I believe she was a widow of his own rank; she lives quite in
seclusion."

"How d' ye do, Mr. Maltravers?  So glad to see you," said the quick,
shrill voice of Mrs. Hare.  "Beautiful ball!  Nobody does things like
Lord Raby; don't you dance?"

"No, madam."

"Oh, you young gentlemen are so _fine_ nowadays!" (Mrs. Hare, laying
stress on the word _young_, thought she had paid a very elegant
compliment, and ran on with increased complacency.)

"You are going to let Burleigh, I hear, to Lord Doltimore,--is it true?
No! really now, what stories people do tell.  Elegant man, Lord
Doltimore!  Is it true, that Miss Caroline is going to marry his
lordship?  Great match!  No scandal, I hope; you'll excuse _me_!  Two
weddings on the _tapis_,--quite stirring for our stupid county.  Lady
Vargrave and Lady Doltimore, two new peeresses.  Which do you think is
the handsomer?  Miss Merton is the taller, but there is something fierce
in her eyes.  Don't you think so?  By the by, I wish you joy,--you'll
excuse _me_."

"Wish me joy, madam?"

"Oh, you are so close.  Mr. Hare says he shall support you.  You will
have all the ladies with you.  Well, I declare, Lord Vargrave is going to
dance.  How old is he, do you think?"

Maltravers uttered an audible _pshaw_, and moved away; but his penance
was not over.  Lord Vargrave, much as he disliked dancing, still thought
it wise to ask the fair hand of Evelyn; and Evelyn, also, could not
refuse.

And now, as the crowd gathered round the red ropes, Maltravers had to
undergo new exclamations at Evelyn's beauty and Vargrave's luck.
Impatiently he turned from the spot, with that gnawing sickness of the
heart which none but the jealous know.  He longed to depart, yet dreaded
to do so.  It was the last time he should see Evelyn, perhaps for years;
the last time he should see her as Miss Cameron!

He passed into another room, deserted by all save four old
gentlemen--Cleveland one of them--immersed in whist; and threw himself
upon an ottoman, placed in a recess by the oriel window.  There, half
concealed by the draperies, he communed and reasoned with himself.  His
heart was sad within him; he never felt before _how_ deeply and _how_
passionately he loved Evelyn; how firmly that love had fastened upon the
very core of his heart!  Strange, indeed, it was in a girl so young, of
whom he had seen but little,--and that little in positions of such quiet
and ordinary interest,--to excite a passion so intense in a man who had
gone through strong emotions and stern trials!  But all love is
unaccountable.  The solitude in which Maltravers had lived, the absence
of all other excitement, perhaps had contributed largely to fan the
flame.  And his affections had so long slept, and after long sleep the
passions wake with such giant strength!  He felt now too well that the
last rose of life had bloomed for him; it was blighted in its birth, but
it could never be replaced.  Henceforth, indeed, he should be alone, the
hopes of home were gone forever; and the other occupations of mind and
soul--literature, pleasure, ambition--were already forsworn at the very
age in which by most men they are most indulged!

O Youth! begin not thy career too soon, and let one passion succeed in
its due order to another; so that every season of life may have its
appropriate pursuit and charm!

The hours waned; still Maltravers stirred not; nor were his meditations
disturbed, except by occasional ejaculations from the four old gentlemen,
as between each deal they moralized over the caprices of the cards.

At length, close beside him he heard that voice, the lightest sound of
which could send the blood rushing through his veins; and from his
retreat he saw Caroline and Evelyn, seated close by.

"I beg pardon," said the former, in a low voice,--"I beg pardon, Evelyn,
for calling you away; but I longed to tell you.  The die is cast.  Lord
Doltimore has proposed, and I have accepted him!  Alas, alas!  I half
wish I could retract!"

"Dearest Caroline!" said the silver voice of Evelyn, "for Heaven's sake,
do not thus wantonly resolve on your own unhappiness!  You wrong
yourself, Caroline! you do, indeed! You are not the vain ambitious
character you affect to be!  Ah, what is it you require?  Wealth?  Are
you not my friend; am I not rich enough for both?  Rank?  What can it
give you to compensate for the misery of a union without love?  Pray,
forgive me for speaking thus.  Do not think me presumptuous, or romantic;
but, indeed, indeed, I know from my own heart what yours must undergo!"

Caroline pressed her friend's hand with emotion.

"You are a bad comforter, Evelyn.  My mother, my father, will preach a
very different doctrine.  I am foolish, indeed, to be so sad in obtaining
the very object I have sought!  Poor Doltimore! he little knows the
nature, the feelings of her whom he thinks he has made the happiest of
her sex; he little knows--"  Caroline paused, turned pale as death, and
then went rapidly on, "but you, Evelyn, _you_ will meet the same fate; we
shall bear it together."

"No! no! do not think so!  Where I give my hand, there shall I give my
heart."

At this time Maltravers half rose, and sighed audibly.

"Hush!" said Caroline, in alarm.  At the same moment, the whist-table
broke up, and Cleveland approached Maltravers.

"I am at your service," said he; "I know you will not stay the supper.
You will find me in the next room; I am just going to speak to Lord
Saxingham."  The gallant old gentleman then paid a compliment to the
young ladies, and walked away.

"So you too are a deserter from the ballroom!" said Miss Merton to
Maltravers as she rose.

"I am not very well; but do not let me frighten you away."

"Oh, no!  I hear the music; it is the last quadrille before supper: and
here is my fortunate partner looking for me."

"I have been everywhere in search of you," said Lord Doltimore, in an
accent of tender reproach: "come, we are almost too late now."

Caroline put her arm into Lord Doltimore's, who hurried her into the
ballroom.

Miss Cameron looked irresolute whether or not to follow, when Maltravers
seated himself beside her; and the paleness of his brow, and something
that bespoke pain in the compressed lip, went at once to her heart.  In
her childlike tenderness, she would have given worlds for the sister's
privilege of sympathy and soothing.  The room was now deserted; they were
alone.

The words that he had overheard from Evelyn's lips, "Where I shall give
my hand, there shall I give my heart," Maltravers interpreted but in one
sense,--"she loved her betrothed;" and strange as it may seem, at that
thought, which put the last seal upon his fate, selfish anguish was less
felt than deep compassion.  So young, so courted, so tempted as she must
be--and with such a protector!--the cold, the unsympathizing, the
heartless Vargrave!  She, too, whose feelings, so warm, ever trembled on
her lip and eye.  Oh! when she awoke from her dream, and knew whom she
had loved, what might be her destiny, what her danger!

"Miss Cameron," said Maltravers, "let me for one moment detain you; I
will not trespass long.  May I once, and for the last time, assume the
austere rights of friendship?  I have seen much of life, Miss Cameron,
and my experience has been purchased dearly; and harsh and hermit-like as
I may have grown, I have not outlived such feelings as you are well
formed to excite.  Nay,"--and Maltravers smiled sadly--"I am not about to
compliment or flatter, I speak not to you as the young to the young; the
difference of our years, that takes away sweetness from flattery, leaves
still sincerity to friendship.  You have inspired me with a deep
interest,--deeper than I thought that living beauty could ever rouse in
me again!  It may be that something in the tone of your voice, your
manner, a nameless grace that I cannot define, reminds me of one whom I
knew in youth,--one who had not your advantages of education, wealth,
birth; but to whom Nature was more kind than Fortune."

He paused a moment; and without looking towards Evelyn, thus renewed,--

"You are entering life under brilliant auspices.  Ah, let me hope that
the noonday will keep the promise of the dawn!  You are susceptible,
imaginative; do not demand too much, or dream too fondly.  When you are
wedded, do not imagine that wedded life is exempt from its trials and its
cares; if you know yourself beloved--and beloved you must be--do not ask
from the busy and anxious spirit of man all which Romance promises and
Life but rarely yields.  And oh!" continued Maltravers, with an absorbing
and earnest passion, that poured forth its language with almost
breathless rapidity,--"if ever your heart rebels, if ever it be
dissatisfied, fly the false sentiment as a sin!  Thrown, as from your
rank you must be, on a world of a thousand perils, with no guide so
constant and so safe as your own innocence, make not that world too dear
a friend.  Were it possible that your own home ever could be lonely or
unhappy, reflect that to woman the unhappiest home is happier than all
excitement abroad.  You will have a thousand suitors hereafter: believe
that the asp lurks under the flatterer's tongue, and resolve, come what
may, to be contented with your lot.  How many have I known, lovely and
pure as you, who have suffered the very affections--the very beauty of
their nature--to destroy them!  Listen to me as a warner, as a brother,
as a pilot who has passed the seas on which your vessel is about to
launch.  And ever, ever let me know, in whatever lands your name may
reach me, that one who has brought back to me all my faith in human
excellence, while the idol of our sex, is the glory of her own.  Forgive
me this strange impertinence; my heart is full, and has overflowed.  And
now, Miss Cameron--Evelyn Cameron--this is my last offence, and my last
farewell!"

He held out his hand, and involuntarily, unknowingly, she clasped it, as
if to detain him till she could summon words to reply.  Suddenly he heard
Lord Vargrave's voice behind.  The spell was broken; the next moment
Evelyn was alone, and the throng swept into the room towards the banquet,
and laughter and gay voices were heard, and Lord Vargrave was again by
Evelyn's side!



CHAPTER IV.

            To you
  This journey is devoted.
       _Lover's Progress_, Act iv. sc. 1.

AS Cleveland and Maltravers returned homeward, the latter abruptly
checked the cheerful garrulity of his friend.  "I have a favour, a great
favour to ask of you."

"And what is that?"

"Let us leave Burleigh tomorrow; I care not at what hour; we need go but
two or three stages if you are fatigued."

"Most hospitable host! and why?"

"It is torture, it is agony to me, to breathe the air of Burleigh," cried
Maltravers, wildly.  "Can you not guess my secret?  Have I then concealed
it so well?  I love, I adore Evelyn Cameron, and she is betrothed to--she
loves--another!"

Mr. Cleveland was breathless with amaze; Maltravers had indeed so well
concealed his secret, and now his emotion was so impetuous, that it
startled and alarmed the old man, who had never himself experienced a
passion, though he had indulged a sentiment.  He sought to console and
soothe; but after the first burst of agony, Maltravers recovered himself,
and said gently,--

"Let us never return to this subject again: it is right that I should
conquer this madness, and conquer it I will!  Now you know my weakness,
you will indulge it.  My cure, cannot commence until I can no longer see
from my casements the very roof that shelters the affianced bride of
another."

"Certainly, then, we will set off to-morrow: my friend! is it indeed--"

"Ah, cease," interrupted the proud man; "no compassion, I implore: give
me but time and silence,--they are the only remedies."

Before noon the next day, Burleigh was once more deserted by its lord.
As the carriage drove through the village, Mrs. Elton saw it from her
open window; but her patron, too absorbed at that hour even for
benevolence, forgot her existence and yet so complicated are the webs of
fate, that in the breast of that lowly stranger was locked a secret of
the most vital moment to Maltravers.

"Where is he going; where is the squire going?" asked Mrs. Elton,
anxiously.

"Dear heart!" said the cottager, "they do say he be going for a short
time to foren parts.  But he will be back at Christmas."

"And at Christmas I may be gone hence forever," muttered the invalid;
"but what will that matter to him--to any one?"

At the first stage Maltravers and his friend were detained a short time
for the want of horses.  Lord Raby's house had been filled with guests on
the preceding night, and the stables of this little inn, dignified with
the sign of the Raby Arms, and about two miles distant from the great
man's place, had been exhausted by numerous claimants returning homeward
from Knaresdean.  It was a quiet, solitary post-house, and patience, till
some jaded horses should return, was the only remedy; the host, assuring
the travellers that he expected four horses every moment, invited them
within.  The morning was cold, and the fire not unacceptable to Mr.
Cleveland; so they went into the little parlour.  Here they found an
elderly gentleman of very prepossessing appearance, who was waiting for
the same object.  He moved courteously from the fireplace as the
travellers entered, and pushed the "B-----shire Chronicle" towards
Cleveland: Cleveland bowed urbanely.  "A cold day, sir; the autumn begins
to show itself."

"It is true, sir," answered the old gentleman; "and I feel the cold the
more, having just quitted the genial atmosphere of the South."

"Of Italy?"

"No, of England only.  I see by this paper (I am not much of a
politician) that there is a chance of a dissolution of parliament, and
that Mr. Maltravers is likely to come forward for this county; are you
acquainted with him, sir?"

"A little," said Cleveland, smiling.

"He is a man I am much interested in," said the old gentleman; "and I
hope soon to be honoured with his acquaintance."

"Indeed! and you are going into his neighbourhood?" asked Cleveland,
looking more attentively at the stranger, and much pleased with a certain
simple candour in his countenance and manner.

"Yes, to Merton Rectory."

Maltravers, who had been hitherto stationed by the window, turned round.

"To Merton Rectory?" repeated Cleveland.  "You are acquainted with Mr.
Merton, then?"

"Not yet; but I know some of his family.  However, my visit is rather to
a young lady who is staying at the rectory,--Miss Cameron."

Maltravers sighed heavily; and the old gentleman looked at him curiously.
"Perhaps, sir, if you know that neighbourhood, you may have seen--"

"Miss Cameron!  Certainly; it is an honour not easily forgotten."

The old gentleman looked pleased.

"The dear child!" said he, with a burst of honest affection, and he
passed his hand over his eyes.  Maltravers drew near to him.

"You know Miss Cameron; you are to be envied, sir," said he.

"I have known her since she was a child; Lady Vargrave is my dearest
friend."

"Lady Vargrave must be worthy of such a daughter.  Only under the light
of a sweet disposition and pure heart could that beautiful nature have
been trained and reared."

Maltravers spoke with enthusiasm; and, as if fearful to trust himself
more, left the room.

"That gentleman speaks not more warmly than justly," said the old man,
with some surprise.  "He has a countenance which, if physiognomy be a
true science, declares his praise to be no common compliment; may I
inquire his name?"

"Maltravers," replied Cleveland, a little vain of the effect his
ex-pupil's name was to produce.

The curate--for it was he--started and changed countenance.

"Maltravers! but he is not about to leave the county?"

"Yes, for a few months."

Here the host entered.  Four horses, that had been only fourteen miles,
had just re-entered the yard.  If Mr. Maltravers could spare two to that
gentleman, who had, indeed, pre-engaged them?

"Certainly," said Cleveland; "but be quick."

"And is Lord Vargrave still at Mr. Merton's?" asked the curate, musingly.

"Oh, yes, I believe so.  Miss Cameron is to be married to him very
shortly,--is it not so?"

"I cannot say," returned Aubrey, rather bewildered.  "You know Lord
Vargrave, sir?"

"Extremely well!"

"And you think him worthy of Miss Cameron?"

"That is a question for her to answer.  But I see the horses are put to.
Good-day, sir!  Will you tell your fair young friend that you have met an
old gentleman who wishes her all happiness; and if she ask you his name,
say Cleveland?"

So saying, Mr. Cleveland bowed, and re-entered the carriage.  But
Maltravers was yet missing.  In fact, he returned to the house by the
back way, and went once more into the little parlour.  It was something
to see again one who would so soon see Evelyn!

"If I mistake not," said Maltravers, "you are that Mr. Aubrey on whose
virtues I have often heard Miss Cameron delight to linger?  Will you
believe my regret that our acquaintance is now so brief?"

As Maltravers spoke thus simply, there was in his countenance, his voice,
a melancholy sweetness, which greatly conciliated the good curate; and as
Aubrey gazed upon his noble features and lofty mien, he no longer
wondered at the fascination he had appeared to exercise over the young
Evelyn.

"And may I not hope, Mr. Maltravers," said he, "that before long our
acquaintance may be renewed?  Could not Miss Cameron," he added, with a
smile and a penetrating look, "tempt you into Devonshire?"

Maltravers shook his head, and, muttering something not very audible,
quitted the room.  The curate heard the whirl of the wheels, and the host
entered to inform him that his own carriage was now ready.

"There is something in this," thought Aubrey, "which I do not comprehend.
His manner, his trembling voice, bespoke emotions he struggled to
conceal.  Can Lord Vargrave have gained his point?  Is Evelyn, indeed, no
longer free?"



CHAPTER V.

  CERTES, c'est un grand cas, Icas,
  Que toujours tracas ou fracas
  Vous faites d'une ou d'autre sort;
  C'est le diable qui vous emporte!*--VOITURE.

  * "Certes, it is the fact, Icas, that you are always engaged in
    tricks or scrapes of some sort or other; it must be the devil
    that bewitches you."

LORD VARGRAVE had passed the night of the ball and the following morning
at Knaresdean.  It was necessary to bring the counsels of the scheming
conclave to a full and definite conclusion; and this was at last
effected.  Their strength numbered, friends and foes alike canvassed and
considered, and due account taken of the waverers to be won over, it
really did seem, even to the least sanguine, that the Saxingham or
Vargrave party was one that might well aspire either to dictate to, or to
break up, a government.  Nothing now was left to consider but the
favourable hour for action.  In high spirits, Lord Vargrave returned
about the middle of the day to the rectory.

"So," thought he, as he reclined in his carriage,--"so, in politics, the
prospect clears as the sun breaks out.  The party I have espoused is one
that must be the most durable, for it possesses the greatest property and
the most stubborn prejudice--what elements for Party!  All that I now
require is a sufficient fortune to back my ambition.  Nothing can clog my
way but these cursed debts, this disreputable want of gold.  And yet
Evelyn alarms me!  Were I younger, or had I not made my position too
soon, I would marry her by fraud or by force,--run off with her to
Gretna, and make Vulcan minister to Plutus.  But this would never do at
my years, and with my reputation.  A pretty story for the newspapers,
d-----n them!  Well, nothing venture, nothing have; I will brave the
hazard!  Meanwhile, Doltimore is mine; Caroline will rule him, and I rule
her.  His vote and his boroughs are something,--his money will be more
immediately useful: I must do him the honour to borrow a few
thousands,--Caroline must manage that for me.  The fool is miserly,
though a spendthrift; and looked black when I delicately hinted the other
day that I wanted a friend--_id est_, a loan! money and friendship same
thing,--distinction without a difference!"  Thus cogitating, Vargrave
whiled away the minutes till his carriage stopped at Mr. Merton's door.

As he entered the hall he met Caroline, who had just quitted her own
room.

"How lucky I am that you have on your bonnet!  I long for a walk with you
round the lawn."

"And I, too, am glad to see you, Lord Vargrave," said Caroline, putting
her arm in his.

"Accept my best congratulations, my own sweet friend," said Vargrave,
when they were in the grounds.  "You have no idea how happy Doltimore is.
He came to Knaresdean yesterday to communicate the news, and his
neckcloth was primmer than ever.  C'est un bon enfant."

"Ah, how can you talk thus?  Do you feel no pain at the thought
that--that I am another's?"

"Your heart will be ever mine,--and that is the true fidelity.  What
else, too, could be done?  As for Lord Doltimore, we will go shares in
him.  Come, cheer thee, _m'amie_; I rattle on thus to keep up your
spirits.  Do not fancy I am happy!"

Caroline let fall a few tears; but beneath the influence of Vargrave's
sophistries and flatteries, she gradually recovered her usual hard and
worldly tone of mind.

"And where is Evelyn?" asked Vargrave.  "Do you know, the little witch
seemed to be half mad the night of the ball.  Her head was turned; and
when she sat next me at supper, she not only answered every question I
put to her _a tort et a travers_, but I fancied every moment she was
going to burst out crying.  Can you tell what was the matter with her?"

"She was grieved to hear that I was to be married to the man I do not
love.  Ah, Vargrave, she has more heart than you have!"

"But she never fancies that you love me?" asked Lumley, in alarm.  "You
women are so confoundedly confidential!"

"No, she does not suspect our secret."

"Then I scarcely think your approaching marriage was a sufficient cause
for so much distraction."

"Perhaps she may have overheard some of the impertinent whispers about
her mother,--'Who was Lady Vargrave?' and 'What Cameron was Lady
Vargrave's first husband?'  _I_ overheard a hundred such vulgar
questions; and provincial people whisper so loud."

"Ah, that is a very probable solution of the mystery; and for my part, I
am almost as much puzzled as any one else can be to know who Lady
Vargrave was!"

"Did not your uncle tell you?"

"He told me that she was of no very elevated birth and station,--nothing
more; and she herself, with her quiet, say-nothing manner, slips through
all my careless questionings like an eel.  She is still a beautiful
creature, more regularly handsome than even Evelyn; and old Templeton had
a very sweet tooth at the back of his head, though he never opened his
mouth wide enough to show it."

"She must ever at least have been blameless, to judge by an air which,
even now, is more like that of a child than a matron."

"Yes; she has not much of the widow about her, poor soul!  But her
education, except in music, has not been very carefully attended to; and
she knows about as much of the world as the Bishop of Autun (better known
as Prince Talleyrand) knows of the Bible.  If she were not so simple, she
would be silly; but silliness is never simple,--always cunning; however,
there is some cunning in her keeping her past Cameronian Chronicles so
close.  Perhaps I may know more about her in a short time, for I intend
going to C-----, where my uncle once lived, in order to see if I can
revive under the rose--since peers are only contraband
electioneerers--his old parliamentary influence in that city: and they
may tell me more there than I now know."

"Did the late lord marry at C-----?"

"No; in Devonshire.  I do not even know if Mrs. Cameron ever was at
C-----."

"You must be curious to know who the father of your intended wife was?"

"Her father!  No; I have no curiosity in that quarter.  And, to tell you
the truth, I am much too busy about the Present to be raking into that
heap of rubbish we call the Past.  I fancy that both your good
grandmother and that comely old curate of Brook-Green know everything
about Lady Vargrave; and, as they esteem her so much, I take it for
granted she is _sans tache_."

"How could I be so stupid!  _A propos_ of the curate, I forgot to tell
you that he is here.  He arrived about two hours ago, and has been
closeted with Evelyn ever since!"

"The deuce!  What brought the old man hither?"

"That I know not.  Papa received a letter from him yesterday morning, to
say that he would be here to-day.  Perhaps Lady Vargrave thinks it time
for Evelyn to return home."

"What am I to do?" said Vargrave, anxiously.  "Dare I yet venture to
propose?"

"I am sure it will be in vain, Vargrave.  You must prepare for
disappointment."

"And ruin," muttered Vargrave, gloomily.  "Hark you, Caroline, she may
refuse me if she pleases.  But I am not a man to be baffled.  Have her I
will, by one means or another; revenge urges me to it almost as much as
ambition.  That girl's thread of life has been the dark line in my woof;
she has robbed me of fortune, she now thwarts me in my career, she
humbles me in my vanity.  But, like a hound that has tasted blood, I will
run her down, whatever winding she takes."

"Vargrave, you terrify me!  Reflect; we do not live in an age when
violence--"

"Tush!" interrupted Lumley, with one of those dark looks which at times,
though very rarely, swept away all its customary character from that
smooth, shrewd countenance.  "Tush!  We live in an age as favourable to
intellect and to energy as ever was painted in romance.  I have that
faith in fortune and myself that I tell you, with a prophet's voice, that
Evelyn shall fulfil the wish of my dying uncle.  But the bell summons us
back."

On returning to the house, Lord Vargrave's valet gave him a letter which
had arrived that morning.  It was from Mr. Gustavus Douce, and ran
thus:--


                         FLEET STREET, ----- 20, 18--.

MY LORD,--It is with the greatest regret that I apprise you, for Self &
Co., that we shall not be able in the present state of the Money Market
to renew your Lordship's bill for 10,000 pounds, due the 28th instant.
Respectfully calling your Lordship's attention to the same, I have the
honour to be, for Self & Co., my Lord,

     Your Lordship's most obedient and most obliged humble servant,
                              GUSTAVUS DOUCE.

To the Right Hon. LORD VARGRAVE, etc.


This letter sharpened Lord Vargrave's anxiety and resolve; nay, it seemed
almost to sharpen his sharp features as he muttered sundry denunciations
on Messrs. Douce and Co., while arranging his neckcloth at the glass.



CHAPTER VI.

  _Sol._ Why, please your honourable lordship, we were talking
  here and there,--this and that.--_The Stranger_.

AUBREY had been closeted with Evelyn the whole morning; and, simultaneous
with his arrival, came to her the news of the departure of Maltravers.
It was an intelligence that greatly agitated and unnerved her; and,
coupling that event with his solemn words on the previous night, Evelyn
asked herself, in wonder, what sentiments she could have inspired in
Maltravers.  Could he love her,--her, so young, so inferior, so
uninformed?  Impossible!  Alas! alas! for Maltravers!  His genius, his
gifts, his towering qualities,--all that won the admiration, almost the
awe, of Evelyn,--placed him at a distance from her heart!  When she asked
herself if he loved her, she did not ask, even in that hour, if she loved
him.  But even the question she did ask, her judgment answered erringly
in the negative.  Why should he love, and yet fly her?  She understood
not his high-wrought scruples, his self-deluding belief.  Aubrey was more
puzzled than enlightened by his conversation with his pupil; only one
thing seemed certain,--her delight to return to the cottage and her
mother.

Evelyn could not sufficiently recover her composure to mix with the party
below; and Aubrey, at the sound of the second dinner-bell, left her to
her solitude, and bore her excuses to Mrs. Merton.

"Dear me!" said that worthy lady; "I am so sorry.  I thought Miss Cameron
looked fatigued at breakfast, and there was something hysterical in her
spirits; and I suppose the surprise of your arrival has upset her.
Caroline, my dear, you had better go and see what she would like to have
taken up to her room,--a little soup and the wing of a chicken."

"My dear," said Mr. Merton, rather pompously, "I think it would be but a
proper respect to Miss Cameron, if you yourself accompanied Caroline."

"I assure you," said the curate, alarmed at the avalanche of politeness
that threatened poor Evelyn,--"I assure you that Miss Cameron would
prefer being left alone at present; as you say, Mrs. Merton, her spirits
are rather agitated."

But Mrs. Merton, with a sliding bow, had already quitted the room, and
Caroline with her.

"Come back, Sophy!  Cecilia, come back!" said Mr. Merton, settling his
_jabot_.

"Oh, dear Evy! poor dear Evy!--Evy is ill!" said Sophy; "I may go to Evy?
I must go, Papa!"

"No, my dear, you are too noisy; these children are quite spoiled, Mr.
Aubrey."

The old man looked at them benevolently, and drew them to his knee; and,
while Cissy stroked his long white hair, and Sophy ran on about dear
Evy's prettiness and goodness, Lord Vargrave sauntered into the room.

On seeing the curate, his frank face lighted up with surprise and
pleasure; he hastened to him, seized him by both hands, expressed the
most heartfelt delight at seeing him, inquired tenderly after Lady
Vargrave, and, not till he was out of breath, and Mrs. Merton and
Caroline returning apprised him of Miss Cameron's indisposition, did his
rapture vanish; and, as a moment before he was all joy, so now he was all
sorrow.

The dinner passed off dully enough; the children, re-admitted to dessert,
made a little relief to all parties; and when they and the two ladies
went, Aubrey himself quickly rose to join Evelyn.

"Are you going to Miss Cameron?" said Lord Vargrave; "pray say how
unhappy I feel at her illness.  I think these grapes--they are very
fine--could not hurt her.  May I ask you to present them with my
best--best and most anxious regards?  I shall be so uneasy till you
return.  Now, Merton (as the door closed on the curate), let's have
another bottle of this famous claret!  Droll old fellow that,--quite a
character!"

"He is a great favourite with Lady Vargrave and Miss Cameron, I believe,"
said Mr. Merton.  "A mere village priest, I suppose; no talent, no
energy--or he could not be a curate at that age."

"Very true,--a shrewd remark.  The Church is as good a profession as any
other for getting on, if a man has anything in him.  I shall live to see
_you_ a bishop!"

Mr. Merton shook his head.

"Yes, I shall; though you have hitherto disdained to exhibit any one of
the three orthodox qualifications for a mitre."

"And what are they, my lord?"

"Editing a Greek play, writing a political pamphlet, and apostatizing at
the proper moment."

"Ha, ha! your lordship is severe on us."

"Not I; I often wish I had been brought up to the Church,--famous
profession, properly understood.  By Jupiter, I should have been a
capital bishop!"

In his capacity of parson, Mr. Merton tried to look grave; in his
capacity of a gentlemanlike, liberal fellow, he gave up the attempt, and
laughed pleasantly at the joke of the rising man.



CHAPTER VII.

  WILL nothing please you?
  What do you think of the Court?--_The Plain Dealer_.

ON one subject Aubrey found no difficulty in ascertaining Evelyn's wishes
and condition of mind.  The experiment of her visit, so far as Vargrave's
hopes were concerned, had utterly failed; she could not contemplate the
prospect of his alliance, and she poured out to the curate, frankly and
fully, all her desire to effect a release from her engagement.  As it was
now settled that she should return with Aubrey to Brook-Green, it was
indeed necessary to come to the long-delayed understanding with her
betrothed.  Yet this was difficult, for he had so little pressed, so
distantly alluded to, their engagement, that it was like a forwardness,
an indelicacy in Evelyn to forestall the longed-for yet dreaded
explanation.  This, however, Aubrey took upon himself; and at this
promise Evelyn felt as the slave may feel when the chain is stricken off.

At breakfast, Mr. Aubrey communicated to the Mertons Evelyn's intention
to return with him to Brook-Green on the following day.  Lord Vargrave
started, bit his lip, but said nothing.

Not so silent was Mr. Merton.

"Return with you! my dear Mr. Aubrey, just consider; it is impossible!
You see Miss Cameron's rank of life, her position,--so very strange; no
servants of her own here but her woman,--no carriage even!  You would not
have her travel in a post-chaise such a long journey!  Lord Vargrave, you
can never consent to that, I am sure?"

"Were it only as Miss Cameron's _guardian_," said Lord Vargrave,
pointedly, "I should certainly object to such a mode of performing such a
journey.  Perhaps Mr. Aubrey means to perfect the project by taking two
outside places on the top of the coach?"

"Pardon me," said the curate, mildly, "but I am not so ignorant of what
is due to Miss Cameron as you suppose.  Lady Vargrave's carriage, which
brought me hither, will be no unsuitable vehicle for Lady Vargrave's
daughter; and Miss Cameron is not, I trust, quite so spoiled by all your
friendly attentions as to be unable to perform a journey of two days with
no other protector than myself."

"I forgot Lady Vargrave's carriage,--or rather I was not aware that you
had used it, my dear sir," said Mr. Merton.  "But you must not blame us,
if we are sorry to lose Miss Cameron so suddenly; I was in hopes that
_you_ too would stay at least a week with us."

The curate bowed at the rector's condescending politeness; and just as he
was about to answer, Mrs. Merton put in,--

"And you see I had set my heart on her being Caroline's bridesmaid."

Caroline turned pale, and glanced at Vargrave, who appeared solely
absorbed in breaking toast into his tea,--a delicacy he had never before
been known to favour.

There was an awkward pause.  The servant opportunely entered with a small
parcel of books, a note to Mr. Merton, and that most blessed of all
blessed things in the country,--the letter-bag.

"What is this?" said the rector, opening his note, while Mrs. Merton
unlocked the bag and dispensed the contents: "Left Burleigh for some
months, a day or two sooner than he had expected; excuse French
leave-taking; return Miss Merton's books, much obliged; gamekeeper has
orders to place the Burleigh preserves at my disposal.  So we have lost
our neighbour!"

"Did you not know Mr. Maltravers was gone?" said Caroline.  "I heard so
from Jenkins last night; he accompanies Mr. Cleveland to Paris."

"Indeed!" said Mrs. Merton, opening her eyes.  "What could take him to
Paris?"

"Pleasure, I suppose," answered Caroline.  "I'm sure I should rather have
wondered what could detain him at Burleigh."

Vargrave was all this while breaking open seals and running his eyes over
sundry scrawls with the practised rapidity of the man of business; he
came to the last letter.  His countenance brightened.

"Royal invitation, or rather command, to Windsor," he cried.  "I am
afraid I, too, must leave you, this very day."

"Bless me!" exclaimed Mrs. Merton; "is that from the king?  Do let me
see!"

"Not exactly from the king; the same thing though:" and Lord Vargrave,
carelessly pushing the gracious communication towards the impatient hand
and loyal gaze of Mrs. Merton, carefully put the other letters in his
pocket, and walked musingly to the window.

Aubrey seized the opportunity to approach him.  "My lord, can I speak
with you a few moments?"

"Me! certainly; will you come to my dressing-room?"



CHAPTER VIII.

    .  .  .  THERE was never
  Poor gentleman had such a sudden fortune.

       BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER: _The Captain_, Act v. sc. 5.

"MY LORD," said the curate, as Vargrave, leaning back in his chair,
appeared to examine the shape of his boots, while in reality "his
sidelong looks;" not "of love," were fixed upon his companion,--"I need
scarcely refer to the wish of the late lord, your uncle, relative to Miss
Cameron and yourself; nor need I, to one of a generous spirit, add that
an engagement could be only so far binding as both the parties whose
happiness is concerned should be willing in proper time and season to
fulfil it."

"Sir!" said Vargrave, impatiently waving his hand; and, in his irritable
surmise of what was to come, losing his habitual self-control, "I know
not what all this has to do with you; surely you trespass upon ground
sacred to Miss Cameron and myself?  Whatever you have to say, let me beg
you to come at once to the point."

"My lord, I will obey you.  Miss Cameron--and, I may add, with Lady
Vargrave's consent--deputes me to say that, although she feels compelled
to decline the honour of your lordship's alliance, yet if in any
arrangement of the fortune bequeathed to her she could testify to you, my
lord, her respect and friendship, it would afford her the most sincere
gratification."

Lord Vargrave started.

"Sir," said he, "I know not if I am to thank you for this information,
the announcement of which so strangely coincides with your arrival.  But
allow me to say that there needs no ambassador between Miss Cameron and
myself.  It is due, sir, to my station, to my relationship, to my
character of guardian, to my long and faithful affection, to all
considerations which men of the world understand, which men of feeling
sympathize with, to receive from Miss Cameron alone the rejection of my
suit."

"Unquestionably Miss Cameron will grant your lordship the interview you
have a right to seek; but pardon me, I thought it might save you both
much pain, if the meeting were prepared by a third person; and on any
matter of business, any atonement to your lordship--"

"Atonement! what can atone to me?" exclaimed Vargrave, as he walked to
and fro the room in great disorder and excitement.  "Can you give me back
years of hope and expectancy,--the manhood wasted in a vain dream?  Had I
not been taught to look to this reward, should I have rejected all
occasion--while my youth was not yet all gone, while my heart was not yet
all occupied--to form a suitable alliance?  Nay, should I have indulged
in a high and stirring career, for which my own fortune is by no means
qualified?  Atonement! atonement!  Talk of atonement to boys!  Sir, I
stand before you a man whose private happiness is blighted, whose public
prospects are darkened, life wasted, fortunes ruined, the schemes of an
existence built upon one hope, which was lawfully indulged, overthrown;
and you talk to me of _atonement_!"

Selfish as the nature of this complaint might be, Aubrey was struck with
its justice.

"My lord," said he, a little embarrassed, "I cannot deny that there is
truth in much of what you say.  Alas! it proves how vain it is for man to
calculate on the future; how unhappily your uncle erred in imposing
conditions, which the chances of life and the caprices of affection could
at any time dissolve!  But this is blame that attaches only to the dead:
can you blame the living?"

"Sir, I considered myself bound by my uncle's prayer to keep my hand and
heart disengaged, that this title--miserable and barren distinction
though it be!--might, as he so ardently desired, descend to Evelyn.  I
had a right to expect similar honour upon her side!"

"Surely, my lord, you, to whom the late lord on his death-bed confided
all the motives of his conduct and the secret of his life, cannot but be
aware that, while desirous of promoting your worldly welfare, and uniting
in one line his rank and his fortune, your uncle still had Evelyn's
happiness at heart as his warmest wish; you must know that, if that
happiness were forfeited by a marriage with you, the marriage became but
a secondary consideration.  Lord Vargrave's will in itself was a proof of
this.  He did not impose as an absolute condition upon Evelyn her union
with yourself; he did not make the forfeiture of her whole wealth the
penalty of her rejection of that alliance.  By the definite limit of the
forfeit, he intimated a distinction between a command and a desire.  And
surely, when you consider all circumstances, your lordship must think
that, what with that forfeit and the estate settled upon the title, your
uncle did all that in a worldly point of view equity and even affection
could exact from him."

Vargrave smiled bitterly, but said nothing.

"And if this be doubted, I have clearer proof of his intentions.  Such
was his confidence in Lady Vargrave, that in the letter he addressed to
her before his death, and which I now submit to your lordship, you will
observe that he not only expressly leaves it to Lady Vargrave's
discretion to communicate to Evelyn that history of which she is at
present ignorant, but that he also clearly defines the line of conduct he
wished to be adopted with respect to Evelyn and yourself.  Permit me to
point out the passage."

Impatiently Lord Vargrave ran his eye over the letter placed in his hand,
till he came to these lines:--


"And if, when she has arrived at the proper age to form a judgment,
Evelyn should decide against Lumley's claims, you know that on no account
would I sacrifice her happiness; that all I require is, that fair play be
given to his pretensions, due indulgence to the scheme I have long had at
heart.  Let her be brought up to consider him her future husband; let her
not be prejudiced against him; let her fairly judge for herself, when the
time arrives."


"You see, my lord," said Mr. Aubrey, as he took back the letter, "that
this letter bears the same date as your uncle's will.  What he desired
has been done.  Be just, my lord, be just, and exonerate us all from
blame: who can dictate to the affections?"

"And I am to understand that I have no chance, now or hereafter, of
obtaining the affections of Evelyn?  Surely, at your age, Mr. Aubrey, you
cannot encourage the heated romance common to all girls of Evelyn's age.
Persons of our rank do not marry like the Corydon and Phyllis of a
pastoral.  At my years, I never was fool enough to expect that I should
inspire a girl of seventeen with what is called a passionate attachment.
But happy marriages are based upon suitable circumstances, mutual
knowledge and indulgence, respect, esteem.  Come, sir, let me hope
yet,--let me hope that, on the same day, I may congratulate you on your
preferment and you may congratulate me upon my marriage."

Vargrave said this with a cheerful and easy smile; and the tone of his
voice was that of a man who wished to convey serious meaning in a jesting
accent.

Mr. Aubrey, meek as he was, felt the insult of the hinted bribe, and
coloured with a resentment no sooner excited than checked.  "Excuse me,
my lord, I have now said all; the rest had better be left to your ward
herself."

"Be it so, sir.  I will ask you, then, to convey my request to Evelyn to
honour me with a last and parting interview."

Vargrave flung himself on his chair, and Aubrey left him.



CHAPTER IX.

  THUS airy Strephon tuned his lyre.--SHENSTONE.

IN his meeting with Evelyn, Vargrave certainly exerted to the utmost all
his ability and all his art.  He felt that violence, that sarcasm, that
selfish complaint would not avail in a man who was not loved,--though
they are often admirable cards in the hands of a man who is.  As his own
heart was perfectly untouched in the matter, except by rage and
disappointment,--feelings which with him never lasted very long,--he
could play coolly his losing game.  His keen and ready intellect taught
him that all he could now expect was to bequeath sentiments of generous
compassion and friendly interest; to create a favourable impression,
which he might hereafter improve; to reserve, in short, some spot of
vantage-ground in the country from which he was to affect to withdraw all
his forces.  He had known, in his experience of women, which, whether as
an actor or a spectator, was large and various--though not among very
delicate and refined natures--that a lady often takes a fancy to a suitor
_after_ she has rejected him; that precisely _because_ she has once
rejected she ultimately accepts him.  And even this chance was, in
circumstances so desperate, not to be neglected.  He assumed, therefore,
the countenance, the postures, and the voice of heart-broken but
submissive despair; he affected a nobleness and magnanimity in his grief,
which touched Evelyn to the quick, and took her by surprise.

"It is enough," said he, in sad and faltering accents; "quite enough for
me to know that you cannot love me,--that I should fail in rendering you
happy.  Say no more, Evelyn, say no more!  Let me spare you, at least,
the pain your generous nature must feel in my anguish.  I resign all
pretensions to your hand; you are free!--may you be happy!"

"Oh, Lord Vargrave! oh, Lumley!" said Evelyn, weeping, and moved by a
thousand recollections of early years.  "If I could but prove in any
other way my grateful sense of your merits, your too partial appreciation
of me, my regard for my lost benefactor, then, indeed, nor till then,
could I be happy.  Oh that this wealth, so little desired by me, had been
more at my disposal! but as it is, the day that sees me in possession of
it, shall see it placed under your disposition, your control.  This is
but justice,--common justice to you; you were the nearest relation of the
departed.  I had no claim on him,--none but affection.  Affection! and
yet I disobey him!"

There was much in all this that secretly pleased Vargrave; but it only
seemed to redouble his grief.

"Talk not thus, my ward, my friend--ah, still my friend," said he,
putting his handkerchief to his eyes.  "I repine not; I am more than
satisfied.  Still let me preserve my privilege of guardian, of
adviser,--a privilege dearer to me than all the wealth of the Indies!"

Lord Vargrave had some faint suspicion that Legard had created an undue
interest in Evelyn's heart; and on this point he delicately and
indirectly sought to sound her.  Her replies convinced him that if Evelyn
had conceived any prepossession for Legard, there had not been time or
opportunity to ripen it into deep attachment.  Of Maltravers he had no
fear.  The habitual self-control of that reserved personage deceived him
partly; and his low opinion of mankind deceived him still more.  For if
there had been any love between Maltravers and Evelyn, why should the
former not have stood his ground, and declared his suit?  Lumley would
have "bah'd" and "pish'd" at the thought of any punctilious regard for
engagements so easily broken having power either to check passion for
beauty, or to restrain self-interest in the chase of an heiress.  He had
known Maltravers ambitious; and with him, ambition and self-interest
meant the same.  Thus, by the very _finesse_ of his character--while
Vargrave ever with the worldly was a keen and almost infallible
observer--with natures of a more refined, or a higher order, he always
missed the mark by overshooting.  Besides, had a suspicion of Maltravers
ever crossed him, Caroline's communications would have dispelled it.  It
was more strange that Caroline should have been blind; nor would she have
been so had she been less absorbed in her own schemes and destinies.  All
her usual penetration had of late settled in self; and an uneasy
feeling--half arising from conscientious reluctance to aid Vargrave's
objects, half from jealous irritation at the thought of Vargrave's
marrying another--had prevented her from seeking any very intimate or
confidential communication with Evelyn herself.

The dreaded conference was over; Evelyn parted from Vargrave with the
very feelings he had calculated on exciting,--the moment he ceased to be
her lover, her old childish regard for him recommenced.  She pitied his
dejection, she respected his generosity, she was deeply grateful for his
forbearance.  But still--still she was free; and her heart bounded within
her at the thought.

Meanwhile, Vargrave, after his solemn farewell to Evelyn, retreated again
to his own room, where he remained till his post-horses arrived.  Then,
descending into the drawing-room, he was pleased to find neither Aubrey
nor Evelyn there.  He knew that much affectation would be thrown away
upon Mr. and Mrs. Merton; he thanked them for their hospitality, with
grave and brief cordiality, and then turned to Caroline, who stood apart
by the window.

"All is up with me at present," he whispered.  "I leave you, Caroline, in
anticipation of fortune, rank, and prosperity; that is some comfort.  For
myself, I see only difficulties, embarrassment, and poverty in the
future; but I despond of nothing.  Hereafter you may serve me, as I have
served you.  Adieu!--I have been advising Caroline not to spoil
Doltimore, Mrs. Merton; he is conceited enough already.  Good-by!  God
bless you all! love to your little girls.  Let me know if I can serve you
in any way, Merton,--good-by again!"  And thus, sentence by sentence,
Vargrave talked himself into his carriage.  As it drove by the
drawing-room windows, he saw Caroline standing motionless where he had
left her; he kissed his hand,--her eyes were fixed mournfully on his.
Hard, wayward, and worldly as Caroline Merton was, Vargrave was yet not
worthy of the affection he had inspired; for she could _feel_, and he
could not,--the distinction, perhaps, between the sexes.  And there still
stood Caroline Merton, recalling the last tones of that indifferent
voice, till she felt her hand seized, and turned round to see Lord
Doltimore, and smile upon the happy lover, persuaded that he was adored!





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, ALICE BY LYTTON, BOOK V ***
By Edward Bulwer Lytton

****** This file should be named 9767.txt or 9767.zip *******

Produced by Dagny; and by David Widger

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*
