Project Gutenberg's Punchinello, Vol. 1, No. 16, July 16, 1870, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Punchinello, Vol. 1, No. 16, July 16, 1870

Author: Various

Posting Date: October 29, 2011 [EBook #9877]
Release Date: February, 2006
First Posted: October 26, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCHINELLO, JULY 16, 1870 ***




Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Sandra
Brown and PG Distributed Proofreaders










[Illustration Vol. I. No. 16.]

SATURDAY, JULY 16, 1870.

PUBLISHED BY THE

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY,

83 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MYSTERY OF MR. E. DROOD,
By ORPHEUS C. KERR.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: See 15th Page for Extra Premiums.]

       *       *       *       *       *

New Novels.

Only a Girl. A Romance from the German, by Mrs. A.L. WISTER. 12mo, cloth,
$2.

Bound Down; or, Life and its Possibilities. By ANNA M. FITCH. A Novel.
2mo, fine cloth, $1.50.

Henry Courtland; or, What a Farmer can Do. By A.J. CLINE. 12mo, fine
cloth, $1.75.

Carlino. A Novel. By the Author of "Dr. Antonio." Illustrated. 8vo, paper
cover, 50 cents.

Rougegorge and other Short Stories. By H.P. SPOFFORD, ALICE CARY, LUCY H.
HOOPER, JANE G. AUSTIN, A.L. WISTER, etc. With Frontispiece. 8vo, paper,
50 cents.

--> For sale by all Booksellers, or will be sent by mail, postage free,
on receipt of price, by

J.B. LIPPINCOTT & CO., Publishers,
715 and 717 Market St., Philadelphia,
And 449 Broome Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONANT'S

PATENT BINDERS
FOR

"PUNCHINELLO,"

to preserve the paper for binding, will be sent postpaid, on receipt of
one Dollar, by

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,

83 Nassau Street, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

HARRISON BRADFORD & CO.'S
STEEL PENS.

These Pens are of a finer quality, more durable, and cheaper than any
other Pen in the market. Special attention is called to the following
grades, as being better suited for business purposes than any Pen
manufactured. The

"505," "22," and the "Anti-Corrosive,"

we recommend for Bank and Office use.

D. APPLETON & CO.,

Sole Agents for United States.

       *       *       *       *       *
RAILWAY.

TRAINS LEAVE DEPOTS

Foot of Chambers Street

and

Foot of Twenty-Third Street,

AS FOLLOWS:

Through Express Trains leave Chambers Street at 8 A.M., 10 A.M., 5:30
P.M., and 7:00 P.M., (daily); leave 23d Street at 7:45 A.M., 9:45 A.M.,
and 5:15 and 6:45 P.M. (daily.) New and improved Drawing-Room Coaches
will accompany the 10:00 A.M. train through to Buffalo, connecting
at Hornellsville with magnificent Sleeping Coaches running through to
Cleveland and Galion. Sleeping Coaches will accompany the 8:00 A.M. train
from Susquehanna to Buffalo, the 5:30 P.M. train from New York to
Buffalo, and the 7:00 P.M. train from New York to Rochester, Buffalo and
Cincinnati. An Emigrant train leaves daily at 7:30 P.M.

FOR PORT JERVIS AND WAY, *11:30 A.M., and 4:30 P.M., (Twenty-third
Street, *11:15 A.M. and 4:15 P.M.)

FOR MIDDLETOWN AND WAY, at 3:30 P.M.,(Twenty-third Street, 3:15 P.M.);
and, Sundays only, 8:30 A.M. (Twenty-third Street, 8:15 P.M.)

FOR GREYCOURT AND WAY, at *8:30 A.M., (Twenty-third Street, 8:15 A.M.)

FOR NEWBURGH AND WAY, at 8:00 A.M., 3:30 and 4:30 P.M. (Twenty-third
Street 7:45 A.M., 3:15 and 4:15 P.M.)

FOR SUFFERN AND WAY, 5:00 P.M. and 6:00 P.M. (Twenty-third Street, 4:45
and 5:45 P.M.) Theatre Train, *11:30 P.M. (Twenty-third Street, *11 P.M.)

FOR PATERSON AND WAY, from Twenty-third Street Depot, at 6:45, 10:15 and
11:45 A.M.; *1:45 3:45, 5:15 and 6:45 P.M. From Chambers Street Depot at
6:45, 10:15 A.M.; 12 M.; *1:45, 4:00, 5:15 and 6:45 P.M.

FOR HACKENSACK AND HILLSDALE, from Twenty-third  Street Depot, at 8:45
and 11:45 A.M.; $7:15 3:45, $5:15, 5:45, and $6:45 P.M. From Chambers
Street Depot, at 9:00 A.M.; 12:00 M.; $2:15, 4:00 $5:15, 6:00, and $6:45
P.M.

FOR PIERMONT, MONSEY AND WAY, from Twenty-third  Street Depot, at
8:45 A.M.; 12:45, {3:15 4:15, 4:46 and {6:15 P.M., and, Saturdays only,
{12 midnight. From Chambers Street Depot, at 9:00 A.M.; 1:00, {3:30,
4:15, 5:00 and {6:30 P.M. Saturdays, only, {12:00 midnight.

Tickets for passage and for apartments in Drawing-Room and Sleeping
Coaches can be obtained, and orders for the Checking and Transfer of
Baggage may be left at the

COMPANY'S OFFICES:

241, 529, and 957 Broadway.
205 Chambers Street.
Cor. 125th Street & Third Ave., Harlem.
338 Fulton Street, Brooklyn.
Depots, foot of Chambers Street and foot
of Twenty-third Street, New York.
3 Exchange Place.
Long Dock Depot, Jersey City,
And of the Agents at the principal Hotels

WM. R. BARR,
_General Passenger Agent._

L. D. RUCKER,
_General Superintendent._

* Daily. $ For Hackensack only. { For Piermont only.

May 2D, 1870.

       *       *       *       *       *

FRESH NOVELS,

PUBLISHED BY

HARPER & BROTHERS,

NEW YORK.

STERN NECESSITY. By F.W. ROBINSON, Author of "Poor Humanity," "Mattie: a
Stray," "For Her Sake," "Carry's Confession," "No Man's Friend," &c. 8vo,
Paper, 50 cents.

GWENDOLINE'S HARVEST. By the Author of "Carlyon's Year," "One of the
Family," "Found Dead," "A Beggar on Horseback," &c. 8vo, Paper, 25 cents.

PUT YOURSELF IN HIS PLACE. By CHARLES READE, Author of "Hard Cash,"
"Griffith Gaunt," &c., &c. FROM THE AUTHOR'S EARLY SHEETS.

HARPER'S OCTAVO EDITION of "Put Yourself in His Place." With all the
Illustrations, including the characteristic Vignettes not to be found in
any other American edition. Paper 75 cents; BOUND IN CLOTH, $1.25.

HARPER'S DUODECIMO EDITION of "Put Yourself in His Place." Uniform with
the Boston Household Edition of Charles Reade's Novels, and bound in
Green-Morocco English Cloth, to match that edition. Illustrated. Price
$1.00.

--> ALL HARPER'S EDITIONS OF "PUT YOURSELF IN HIS PLACE" are Illustrated.

THE VICAR OF BULLHAMPTON. By ANTHONY TROLLOPE, Author of "The Bertrams,"
"Castle Richmond," "Framley Parsonage," "Orley Farm," "Small House at
Allington," &c. With Illustrations. 8vo, Paper, $1.25; Cloth, $1.75.

MISS VAN KORTLAND. A Novel of American Society. By the Author of "My
Daughter Elinor." 8vo, Paper, $1.00.

BENEATH THE WHEELS. By the Author of "Olive Varcoe," &c. 8vo, Paper,
50 cents.

BAFFLED; or, Michael Brand's Wrong. By JULIA GODDARD, Author of "Joyce
Dormer's Story," "The Search for the Gral," &c. Illustrated. 8vo, Paper,
75 cents.

TOM BROWN'S SCHOOL DAYS. By AN OLD BOY. New Edition. With numerous
illustrations by Arthur Hughes and Sidney Prior Hall. 8vo, Paper,
50 cents.

DEBENHAM'S VOW. By AMELIA B. EDWARDS, Author of "Barbara's History,"
"Half a Million of Money," "Miss Carew," &c., &c. Illustrated. 8vo,
Paper, 75 cents.

A BRAVE LADY. By the Author of "John Halifax, Gentleman," &c. With
Illustrations. 8vo, Paper, $1.00; Cloth, $1.50.

--> HARPER & BROTHERS WILL SEND EITHER OF THE ABOVE WORKS BY MAIL,
 POSTAGE PREPAID, TO ANY PART OF THE UNITED STATES, ON THE RECEIPT OF THE
PRICE.

       *       *       *       *       *

FORST & AVERELL

Steam, Lithograph, and Letter Press

PRINTERS,

EMBOSSERS, ENGRAVERS, AND LABEL MANUFACTURERS.

Sketches and Estimates furnished upon application.

23 Platt Street, and
[P.O. Box 2845.] 20-22 Gold Street,

NEW YORK.


       *       *       *       *       *

DIBBLEEANIA,

AND

Japonica Juice,

FOR THE HAIR.

The most effective Soothing and Stimulating Compounds
ever offered to the public for the

Removal of Scurf, Dandruff, &c.

For consultation, apply at

WILLIAM DIBBLEE'S,

Ladies' Hair Dresser and Wig Maker.

854 BROADWAY, N.Y. City.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOLEY'S
GOLD PENS.

THE BEST AND CHEAPEST.

256 BROADWAY.

       *       *       *       *       *

$2 to ALBANY and TROY.

The Day Line Steamboats C. Vibbard and Daniel Drew, commencing May 31,
will leave Vestry st. Pier at 8:45, and Thirty-fourth st. at 9 a.m.,
landing at Yonkers, (Nyack, and Tarrytown by ferry-boat), Cozzens, West
Point, Cornwall, Newburgh, Poughkeepsie, Rhinebeck, Bristol, Catskill,
Hudson, and New-Baltimore. A special train of broad-gauge cars in
connection with the day boats will leave on arrival at Albany
(commencing June 20) for Sharon Springs. Fare $4.25 from New York and
for Cherry Valley. The Steamboat Seneca will transfer passengers from
Albany to Troy.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE

MERCHANTS'

Life Insurance Company

OF NEW YORK,

Office, 257 BROADWAY

ORGANIZED UNDER THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK.

Issues all kinds of Life and Endowment Policies on the Mutual System,
free from restriction on travel and occupation, which permit residence
anywhere without extra charge.

Premiums may be paid annually, semi-annually, or quarterly in cash.

All Policies are non-forfeitable, and participate in the profits of the
Company.

Dividends are made annually, on the Contribution plan.

Pamphlets containing Rates of Premium, and information on the subject of
Life Insurance, may be obtained at the office of the Company, or of any
of its Agents.

Parties desiring to represent this Company in the capacity of Agents
will please address the New York Office.

WILLIAM T. PHIPPS,

_President_.

A. D. HOLLY, _Secretary_.

O. S. PAINE, M. D. _Medical Examiner_.

HENRY HILTON, _Counsel_.

C. H. KING, M. D. _Asst-Med. Ex._

Each Agent in direct communication with the New York Office.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MYSTERY OF MR. E. DROOD.

AN ADAPTATION.

BY ORPHEUS C. KERR.




CHAPTER X.--(_Continued_.)


The Pond at Bumsteadville is sufficiently near the turnpike to be
readily reached from the latter, and, if mentioned in the advertisement
of a summer boarding-house, would be called Lake Duckingham, on account
of the fashionable ducks resorting thither for bathing and flirtation in
the season. When July's sun turns its tranquil mirror to hues of amber
and gold, the slender mosquito sings Hum, sweet Hum, along its margin;
and when Autumn hangs his livery of motley on the trees, the glassy
surface breathes out a mist wherefrom arises a spectre, with one hand of
ice and the other of flame, to scatter Chills and Fever. Strolling
beside this picturesque watering-place in the dusk, the Gospeler
suddenly caught the clatter of a female voice, and, in a moment, came
face to face with MONTGOMERY and MAGNOLIA PENDRAGON.

"A cold and frog-like place, this, for a lady's walk, Miss PENDRAGON,"
he said, hastily swallowing a bronchial troche to neutralize the damp
air admitted in speaking. "I hope you have on your overshoes."

"My sister brings me here," explained the brother, "so that her constant
talking to me, may not cause other people's heads to pain them."

"I believe," continued the Reverend OCTAVIUS, walking slowly on with
them, "I believe, Mr. PENDRAGON, your sister finds out from you
everything that you learn, or say, or do?"

"Everything," assented the young man, who seemed greatly exhausted. "She
averages one question a minute."

"Consequently," went on Mr. SIMPSON, "she knows that I have advised you
to make some kind of apology to EDWIN DROOD, for the editorial remarks
passing between you on a certain important occasion?" He looked at the
sister as he spoke, and took that opportunity to quickly swallow a
quinine powder as a protection from the chills.

"My brother, sir," said MAGNOLIA, "because, like the Lesbian Alcaeus,
fighting for the liberty of his native Mitylene, he has sympathized with
his native South, finds himself treated by Mr. DROOD with a lack of
magnanimity of which even the renegade PITTACUS would have been
ashamed."

"But even at that," returned the Gospeler, much educated by her remark,
"would it not be better for us all, to have this hapless
misunderstanding manfully explained away, and a reconciliation
achieved?"

"Did AESCHYLUS explain to the Areopagus, after he had been unjustly
abused?" asked the young female student, eagerly. "Or did he, rather,
nobly prefer to remain silent, even until AMEINIAS reminded his
prejudiced Yankee judges that he had fought at Salamis?"

"Dear me," ejaculated the Gospeler, gasping, "I only meant--"

"I defend my brother," continued MAGNOLIA, passionately, "as in the
Antigone of SOPHOCLES, ELECTRA defends ORESTES; and even if he has no
PYLADES, he shall still be not without a friend in the habitation of the
Pylopidae."

"Upon my soul!" murmured the Reverend Mr. SIMPSON, "this is a dreadful
state of things."

"I may as well confess to you, sir," said MONTGOMERY, temporarily
removing his fingers from his ears, "that I admire Miss POTTS as much as
I'm down on DROOD."

"He admires her," struck in his sister, "as ALCMAN, of Sardis, admired
MEGALOSTRATA; and, in her betrothal to a Yankee, sees another SAPPHO
matrimonially sacrificed to another CERCOLAS of Andros."

"Mr. PENDRAGON," panted the Gospeler, "you must give up this
infatuation. The Flowerpot is engaged to another, and you have no
business to express such sentiments for another's bride until after she
is married. Eloquently as your sister--"

"I pretend to be no MYRTIS, in genius," continued MAGNOLIA, humbly. "I
am not an ERINNA, an AMYTE, a PRAXILLA, or a NOSSIS; but all that is
intellectually repugnant within me is stirred by this treatment of my
brother, who is no PHILODEMUS to find in Mr. DROOD his PISO; and
sometimes I feel as though, like another SIMONIDES, I could fly with him
from this inhospitable Northern house of SCOPAS, to the refuge of some
more generous DIOSCURI. In the present macrocosm, to which we have come
from our former home's microcosm, my brother is persistently maligned,
even by Mr. BUMSTEAD, who may yet, if I am any judge, meet the fate of
ANACREON, as recorded by SINDAS; though, in his case, the choking will
not be accomplished by a grape-stone, but by a clove."

"Well, well," said the Reverend OCTAVIUS, in a faint voice, "I shall
expect you to at least meet EDWIN DROOD half-way in a reconciliation,
Mr. PENDRAGON, for your own sake. I will see that he makes the first
advance."

"Generous and dear tutor!" exclaimed MONTGOMERY, "I will do anything,
with you for my guide."

"Follow your guide penitently, brother," cried his sister, pathetically,
"and you will find in him a relenting--POLYNICUS. Whatever we may feel
towards others," she added, catching and kissing the overpowered
Gospeler's hand, as they parted company, "you shall ever be our chosen,
trusted and only PSYCHOPOMPOS[A]."

Holding his throbbing head with both his hands, as he walked feebly
homeward, the worn-out Gospeler noticed a light streaming from Mr.
BUMSTEAD'S window; and, inspired by a sudden impulse, entered the
boarding-house and ascended straightway to the Ritualistic organist's
rooms. BUMSTEAD was asleep upon the rug before the fire, with his
faithful umbrella under his arm, when Mr. SIMPSON, after vainly
knocking, opened the door; and never could the Gospeler forget how, upon
being addressed, the sleeper started wildly up, made a futile pass at
him with the umbrella, took a prolonged and staring drink from a pitcher
of water on the table, and hurriedly ate a number of cloves from a
saucer near an empty lemon-tea goblet over the mantel.

"Why, it's only I," explained the Reverend OCTAVIUS, rather alarmed by
the glare with which he was regarded.

"Sit down, my friends," said MR. BUMSTEAD, huskily; himself taking a
seat upon a coal-scuttle near at hand, with considerable violence. "I'm
glad you aroused me from a dreadful dream of reptiles. I sh'pose you
want me to seeyouhome, sir?"

"Not at all," was the Gospeler's answer. "In fact, Mr. BUMSTEAD, I am
anxious to bring about a reconciliation, between these two young men.
Let us have peace."

"If you want to let's have peash," observed the other, rather vaguely,
"why don't you go fishing whenever there's any fighting talk, shir! Such
a course is not, you'll Grant, unpresidented."

"I believe," said Mr. SIMPSON, waiving the suggestion, "that you
entertain no favorable opinion of young PENDRAGON!"

Reaching to a book on the table, and, after various airy failures,
laying hold upon it, Mr. BUMSTEAD answered: "This is my Diary,
gentlemen; to be presented to Mrs. STOWE, when I'm no more, for a
memoir. You, being two clergymen, wouldn't care to read it. Here's my
entry on the night of the caucus in this room. Lish'n now: 'Half-pash
Ten.--Considering the Democratic sentiments of the MONTGOMERIES
PENDRAGONS, and their evident disinclination to vote the Republican
Ticket, I b'lieve them capable of any crime. If they should kill my two
nephews, it would be no hic-straordinary sh'prise. Have just been in to
look at my nephews asleep, to make sure that the PENDRAGONS have put no
snakes in their bed.' Thash is _one_ entry," continued Mr. BUMSTEAD,
momentarily pausing to make a blow with the fire-shovel at some
imaginary creature crawling across the rug. "Here's another, written
next morning after cloves: 'My nephews have gone to New York together
this A.M. They laughed when I cautioned them against the MONTGOMERIES,
and said they didn't see it. I am still very uneasy, however, and have
hurriedly pulled off my boots to kill the reptiles in them. How's this
for high?" Mr. BUMSTEAD fell into a doze for an instant, and then added:
"I see the name 'J. BUMSTEAD' signed to this. Who'sh _he_?--Oh! i'mushbe
myself."

"Well, well," commented the slightly astonished Gospeler, "whatever my
be your private opinions, I ask you, as a matter of evident public
propriety, and for the good of everybody, to soften Mr. DROOD toward Mr.
PENDRAGON, as I have already softened Mr. PENDRAGON toward Mr. DROOD.
You and I must put an end to this foolish quarrel."

"Thashis so." said Mr. BUMSTEAD, with sudden assent, laboriously gaining
his feet to bid his guest good-bye, and rather absent-mindedly opening
the umbrella over his head as he fumbled for the knob of the door. "You
and I musht reconcile these four young men. Gooright, shir. Take a
little soda-water in the morning and you'll be auright, shir."

On the third day after this interview, Mr. BUMSTEAD waited upon Mr.
SIMPSON with the following note, which, after searching agitatedly for
it in his hat and all his pockets, he finally found up one of his
sleeves: "_My dear_ JACK:--I am much pleased to hear of your
conversation about me with that good man whom you call 'the Reverends
Messieurs SIMPSON,' and shall gladly comply with his wish for a make-up
between PENDRAGON and myself. Invite PENDRAGON to dinner on Christmas
Eve, when only we three shall be together, and we'll shake hands. Ever,
dear clove-y JACK, yours truly, EDWIN DROOD."

"You think Mr. PENDRAGON will accept, then?" said the Gospeler.

Mr. BUMSTEAD nodded darkly, shook hands, bowed to a large armchair for
Mrs. SIMPSON, and retired with much stateliness.


[Footnote A: The Adapter refers confidently to any Southern female novel
of the period for proof, that sentimental Magnolian school-girls always
talk, or write, everything educational, except good English, when
conferring with their deafened masculine friends.]




CHAPTER XI.


A PICTURE AND A PARCEL.


Behind the most sample-roomey, fire-insuranceish, and express-wagonized
part of Broadway, New York, yawns a venerable street called Nassau;
wherein architecture is a monster of such hideous mien that to be hated
needs but to be rented, and more full-grown men stare into shoe-stores
and shirt-emporiums without buying anything than in any other part of
the world. Near the lower end of this quaint avenue rises the
Post-Office, sending aloft a wooden steeple which is the coffin of a
dead clock, and looking, altogether, like some good, old-fashioned
country church, which, having come to town many years ago to see its
city cousins, and been discouraged by their brown-stone airs, retired,
much demoralized, into a shady by-way, and there fell from grace into a
kind of dissipated cross between Poor-House and railroad depot. To reach
this amazing edifice, with too much haste for more than a momentary
glimpse of its harrowing exterior, and to get away from it, with a speed
as little complimentary to the charms of its shadow, are, apparently,
the two great and exclusive objects of the thousands swarming down and
up the narrow street all through a day. Some twenty odd boot-shops, all
next-door-but-one to each other, startlingly alike in their despondent
outer appearances, and uniformly conducted by embittered elderly men of
savage aspect--seem to sue in vain from year to year for at least one
customer; and as many other melancholy dens for the sale of exactly the
things no one but a madman would want to buy while on his way to a
Post-Office, or from it, appear to wait as hopelessly for the first
purchaser. There are, too, no end of open-air dealers in such curious
postal incidentals as ghastly apples, insulting neck-ties, and
impracticable pocket-combs; to whom, possibly, an unwholesome errand boy
may be seen applying for a bargain about once in the lifetime of an
ordinary _habitu�_ of the street, but whose general wares were never
seen selling to the extent of four shillings by any living observer.
Still, with an affront to human credulity of which only newspapers are
capable, it has been declared, in print, that there are bootmakers and
apple-women of Nassau who continually buy choice up-town corner-lots
with their profits; and, if it may be therefrom inferred that the other
trades of the street do as incredibly well, it were wise, perhaps, to be
further convinced that people have a well-established habit of
stealthily laying in their new raiment, fruit, and toilet articles while
going for their business-mails, and at once relinquish all earthly
confidence in the senses obstinately refuting the theory.

About half-way between end and end of Nassau street stands a row of what
were modest dwelling-houses in the remote days when the city was under
the rule of the Americans, but are now only so many floors of law
offices. Who owns them is not known; for proprietors of real-estate in
this extraordinary highway of antiquity are never mentioned in public
like owners in any other street; but they are shabby, dreary,
hopeless-looking old piles, suggestive of having, perhaps, been hurried
and tumbled through musty law-suits scores of times, and occupied at
last by the robber Law itself for costs. On a certain dark, foggy
afternoon in December, one of the seediest of the fallen brick
brotherhood presented a particularly dingy appearance, as the gas-lights
necessitated by the premature gloom of the hour gleamed dimly through a
blearing window-pane here and there. The house still retained the narrow
street-door, hall-way, and abrupt immediate stairway of its earlier
days; and had, too, the old-style goodly single brown stone for a
"stoop," along the front fall of which, in faded white block letters, as
though originally done with a stencil-plate, appeared the strange
device:

  S--T--1860--X.

Whether this curious legend referred to the sweets or bitters of the
tenement's various experiences; whether it meant Subjected To 1860
'Xecutions, or Sacrificed to 1860 'Xecutors, or Sentenced to Wait e'en
Sixty 'Xigencies, did not bother the head of Mr. DIBBLE, who came in
from Gowanus every morning to occupy his law-office up-stairs, and was
sitting thoughtfully therein, before a grate fire, on the dull, wintry
afternoon in question.

Severely unostentatious was that office, with its two ink-stained desks,
shelves of lettered deed-boxes, glass case of law-books in sheep, and
vellum-covered reading-table in the centre of the room. Its prompt
lesson for the visitor was: You are now in the Office of an old-school
Constitutional Lawyer, Sir; and if you want an Absolute Divorce,
Obtained for No Cause, in Any State; No Publicity; No Charges; you must
step around to a certain newspaper sanctum for your witnesses, and apply
to some other legal practitioner. In this establishment, sir, after you
have left your measure in the shape of a retaining fee, we fit you with
a suit warranted to last as long as you do. We cut your pockets to suit
ourselves, but furnish you as much choler as you can stand. If you are a
pursey man the suit will have no lack of sighs for you; if you are thin,
it will make your waste the greater.

Mr. DIBBLE'S usual companion in this office was his clerk, BLADAMS, who
generally wrote at the second desk, and, consequently, was a person of
another deskscription. A politician in former days--when he was known as
Mr. WILLIAM ADAMS--this clerk had aspired to office in New York, and
freely spent his means to attain the same. His name, however, was too
much for his fortune. Public credulity revolted from the pretence that a
WILLIAM ADAMS had come from Ireland some years before, on purpose to
found the family of which the later candidate of the same name claimed
to be a descendant; and, after an election in which he had spent the
last of his money, he was "counted out" in favor of a rather hod
character named O'GLOORAL. Thus practically taught to understand the
political genius of a Republic, which, as gloriously contrasted with any
effete monarchy ruled by a Peerage, looks for its own governing class to
the Steerage, Mr. WILLIAM ADAMS subsided impecuniously into plain BILL
ADAMS and a book-keepership in dry goods; and was ultimately blurred
into BLADAMS and employment as a copyist by Mr. DIBBLE, to whom his
experience of spending every cent he had in the world, and getting
nothing in the world for it but wrinkles, seemed felicitously legal and
almost supernaturally qualifying for law-writing. BLADAMS was about
forty years old, though appearing much older: with a slight cast in his
left eye, a pimply pink countenance, and a circular piece of unimproved
property on top of his head.

"Any news?" inquired Mr. DIBBLE, as this member of the once powerful
American race entered the office and still grasped the edge of the door.

"I saw Mr. DROOD across the street just now," was the answer.

"And what did he say, BLADAMS?"

"That, in turn he'd see _me_ across the street; and here he is,"
returned the clerk, advancing into the room.

"Ah, my dear Mr. EDWIN, glad to see you!" exclaimed Mr. DIBBLE, rising
to his feet and turning about to greet the new comer. "Sit down by the
fire; and don't mind the presence of Mr. BLADAMS, who was once a
gentleman."

"Thank you, old man, I don't know but I _will_ take a glow with you,"
said EDWIN, accepting a chair and throwing aside hat and overcoat.

"You're just in time to dine with me," continued the lawyer. "I'll send
across to a restaurant for three stews and as many mugs of ale. We must
ask Mr. BLADAMS to join us, you see; for he was once a decent man, and
might not like to be sent out for oysters unless asked to take some."

"If they're the small black ones you generally treat on, I'd rather be
excused," grumbled Mr. BLADAMS, involuntarily placing a hand upon his
stomach, as though already paying the penalty of such bivalvular
hospitality.

"Order saddle-rocks this time," was the reckless response of his
employer. "Mr. EDWIN is so rarely our guest that we must do the
princely. You'll tell them, BLADAMS, to send plenty of crackers, and
request the waiters to keep their fingers out of the stews while
bringing the latter over. I've known waiters to have their finger-nails
boiled off in time, by a habit of carrying soups and stews with the ends
of their digits in them."

The clerk departing to order the feast, Mr. DIBBLE renewed his attention
to Mr. E. DROOD, who had already taken his ball from his pocket and was
practicing against the mantel.

"I suppose you are on your way to Bumsteadville, again, Mr. EDWIN, and
have called to see if I have any message for my pretty ward over there."

"That's the ticket," assented EDWIN, making a neat fly-catch.

"You're impatient to be there, of course?" assented Mr. DIBBLE, with
what might have passed for an attempt at archness if he had not been so
wholly devoted to squareness.

"I believe the Flowerpot is expecting me," yawned the young man.

"Do you keep plants there, Mr. EDWIN?"

"The whole thing is a regular plant, Mr. DIBBLE."

"But you spoke about a flowerpot."

EDWIN stretched his feet further toward the fire, and explained that he
meant Miss POTTS. "Did she say anything to you about the PENDRAGONS,
when you saw her?" he inquired.

"What _are_ pendragons?" asked the lawyer, wonderingly.

"One of them is a schoolmate of hers. A girl with some style about her."

"No," said Mr. DIBBLE, "she did not.--But here comes BLADAMS."

(_To be Continued_.)

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR AGRICULTURAL COLUMN.

MEMORABILIA OF "WHAT I KNOW ABOUT FARMING."

To avoid the charge of plagiarism I have concluded to adopt the above,
as the title of the following statistics.

Many persons have trifled with the subject of agriculture; notably among
these may be mentioned the "self-made" man and the innocent who has been
abroad. I propose to attack the subject seriously, and to lay before the
readers of PUNCHINELLO information which will make their hair (if it be
of a carroty hue,) stand on end, and will certainly appease their
curiosity.

There are several ways in which agriculture may be attacked. 1st,
Scientifically, (but then you are likely to get to Lie-big.) 2nd,
Theologically, (and a vast deal of theology may be picked up on a
well-located farm, for do we not find "sermons in stones"?) 3d,
Humorously, (which is the way in which the aforesaid "self-made" man
advances to it,) and 4th, Practically, (in which way, I think, that
innocent gets at it.) Now, when, during the war, I was building forts at
the Dry Tortugas, my overseer informed me that a fort was most easily
taken when attacked on all sides, so I have concluded to pitch into
agriculture from every quarter. Therefore my remarks may be considered
as made in a Scientific-theological-humorous-practical sense.

Postponing a description of soils to a future time, I proceed to
elucidate, first,

CORN.

Of this vegetable there are five varieties, viz.: hard corn, soft corn,
chicken corn, pop corn, and Indian corn. It is a very useful production,
as it affords occupation to a large number of itinerant persons, who
have peculiar ways of sub-soiling it, some by a knife, some by washes,
and some by plasters. This vegetable is generally planted early,
(shoemakers having a monopoly of the cultivation,) and, curiously
enough, the larger the crop the less the owner likes it. Rainy weather
is good for this vegetable, as a damp day swells it very rapidly. It
requires a deep soil, for you cannot have any corn without at least one
foot, though two feet will probably produce a much larger crop.

The best treatment for hard corn is to subsoil it with a hatchet, though
a little judicious paring is good; soft corn sometimes does the pairing
itself, though not judiciously. Soft corn is sometimes called sweet
corn, on the principle, "sweet are the uses of adversity." The variety
of this vegetable cultivated by roosters is called chicken corn, though
no farmer can give a reason therefor, as no chicken ever had anything to
do with a shoe, unless, perhaps, "shoo-fly." Corn cultivated by an old
maid is irreverently called pop-corn. Why Indian corn should differ from
white corn, I have never yet been able to discover. It flourishes under
the same circumstances, and requires the same kind of care, and, except
in color, cannot be distinguished from the white. Probably RED CLOUD
could have told us the difference, if he had been properly interviewed.

Scientifically, corn is _tumorus in footibus_; theologically, it is a
"condemned" nuisance; humorously, you can't plant your foot without
planting corn; practically, everybody treads on it.

LOT.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO MANAGERS OF RAILROADS.

PUNCHINELLO invites the attention of managers of railroads, generally,
but especially that of the President and Directors of the Morris and
Essex Railroad Company, to his new Patent, Portable, Folding, Tripodular
Derrick, with self-elongating extensions. The purposes to which this
machine may be applied are too numerous to mention, but it will be found
particularly useful for lifting up, and expelling from the cars, the
heavy commuters of the railroad just referred to, who decline to pay
double fare for stopping at Newark, and who sometimes even object to
being ejected for non-payment of said perfectly fair fare.

In practical operation this machine is at once simple and complete. It
is also refined, elevating, symmetrical, and chaste. By properly
adjusting it, a railroad conductor can easily lift a recalcitrant
passenger, and project him through one of the windows of the car,
(provided said window is large enough to admit of such exit,) into any
selected pool, or pond, or quagmire, or any other sort of mire, of the
miasmatic salt meadows, with the produce of which Morris and Essex stock
is so satisfactorily salted down.

Recent experiments upon pinguid and repudiating commuters, in the old
way of bullying, coaxing, and "soft-sawdering," have proved to be utter
failures. The united forces of a conductor and two brakesmen of the
Morris and Essex R.R. proved, in a late instance of a member of the Fat
Men's Club, quite inadequate to the ejection of that person from the car
of which he occupied a conspicuous fraction. The obese fellow declined
to have his ticket punched, and defied the officers of the road to come
on and punch his head. It is for the expulsion of such blisters upon the
social cuticle that PUNCHINELLO'S invention has been specially devised.

As it is intended solely for the use and benefit of railroad managers,
no further particulars respecting it will be supplied to recalcitrant
commuters unless their applications are accompanied with Four Dollars,
respectively--the regulated price of one year's subscription to
PUNCHINELLO'S witty, plastic, unrivalled, intermittent, hebdomadal
publication. Should no purchase of the patent in question be made by the
directory of the Morris and Essex Railroad, however, PUNCHINELLO will
then meet contingencies by condensing the machine, reducing it so much
in size that a commuter may easily carry one in his waistcoat pocket, to
be ready, when necessary, for extracting an insolent conductor out of
his boots; or, should the occasion arise, for the immediate evulsion
from office of the autocratic President of the concern, himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

LOCAL.

The enterprising reporter who discovered an earthquake in the eastern
districts of the city, a few days since, has been obliged to employ a
snake-charmer to extract from his left boot an immense anaconda that had
effected a lodgement there.

[Illustration: FOLLOWING SUIT.-A Possible Sort of Reta(i)liation.

"GOOD GRACIOUS, ARABELLA! DO BE CAREFUL--YOU'VE GOT YOUR FOOT ON THE
GENTLEMAN'S TRAIN!"

"WELL, HOW CAN ONE HELP IT, WHEN THOSE ABSURD TRAINS ARE ALWAYS GETTING
UNDER ONE'S FEET?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FEMALE GENTLEMAN.

A MOURNFUL BALLAD OF THE PERIOD.

  A certain fair young maid,
    With mind on progress bent,
  Could not endure the way
    Reformers mostly went.

  Those rights she wished to gain,
    Which SUSAN A. expects,
  But still she would not lose
    The softness of her sex.

  If at a station she
    For cars did wait in vain,
  She would not stride about,
    And "damn" the hapless train.

  "With men I'll equal be,"
    She said, "if women can;
  But still I must become
    A female gentleman.

  Hereafter I shall try
    Polite and kind to be;
  And treat all gentlemen
    As gentlemen treat me."

  One morning, in a stage,
    She rode to STEWART'S store--
  A young man soon got in,
    And sat down near the door.

  Then, leaning towards the man,
    While passengers did stare,
  She smiling said, "Good sir,
    Shall I pass up your fare?"

  The young man started back
    As if he had been shot.
  Said he, "This dollar bill?
    I think I'd rather not!"

  The poor girl sat abashed,
    While every one began
  To have suspicions of
    This female gentleman.

  One morning, hast'ning home,
    It rained--to her regret,
  And just before her walked
    A young man getting wet.

  She stepped up to him quick,
    And said, with courtesy rare,
  "It's raining, sir; will you
    My large umbrella share?"

  The young man sprang aside,
    Beneath a leaky spout;
  The water from his clothes
    Ran like a stream for trout.

  His hand upon his watch
    He clapped, and cried, "Don't stop!
  Just travel on, I say,
    Or I shall call a 'cop!'"

  This sort of thing she tried
    In many such a case;
  But every time she met
    Deplorable disgrace.

  At last she said, "Oh, ho!
  My plan it is no use;
  When I politeness show
    I always get abuse.

  The day is yet to come
    When female courtesy
  Is wanted by the men;
    No more of it for me!"

  She straight sought SUSAN A.,
    And joined her haughty clan
  And tried no more to be
    A female gentleman.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR PORTFOLIO.

DEAR PUNCHINELLO: Having been appointed by the Committee of the
"American Universal Protection Society," of which you are chairman, to
call upon our honored Secretary of State, with the view of obtaining
protection for the interests of our merchants who are now endeavoring to
create a trade in ant-eaters with the inhabitants of the Chickadiddle
Islands in the South Sea, I have the honor to submit the following
synopsis of what took place at the interview:

I found Mr. FISH in a state of partial exhaustion, owing to the unusual
heat of the weather, and the perusal of a fresh batch of compliments
forwarded to him by his particular friend in New York, the Hon. C.
ANDERSON DANA.

Three negresses stood about him with palm-leaf fans, endeavoring to
accelerate the movement of the atmosphere in the very close room to
which the privacy of his feelings sometimes drives him. He was reclining
upon a sofa when I entered, but immediately arose and motioned me to
take a seat. I had scarcely occupied a comfortable looking stuffed
back-piece of furniture, when a pricking sensation in the region of my
coat-tails caused me to resume the perpendicular with amazing rapidity,
and, upon looking down, I observed the point of a pin protruding through
the cushion of the chair. The Secretary did not lose his gravity, but
very heartily apologized for what he called the "little _contretemps_."
The smarting sensation made me a little lax in speech, so that I did not
choose my words with that regard for the majesty of a Premier which I
came there at first disposed to do. He listened to my recital of the
application with perfect equanimity, until I mentioned the name of
PUNCHINELLO. At this point he colored slightly, bit his nether lip, and
exclaimed, with evident vexation:

"What! the editor of a sheet that has dared to speak of me as a "scaly"
fellow, and hold my policy up to the laughter of the nation?"

"Pardon me, Mr. Secretary," I interposed, with all the courtesy of
manner I could muster, "but I think you mistake the motive of Mr.
PUNCHINELLO in applying that description to a person so august."

"Fire and fiddlesticks, sir! do you take me for a fool?"

I pressed my hand in the vicinity of the fifth rib on my left side, and
solemnly asseverated that I did not.

"It makes no difference," added the great man, in an excited tone. "I
can entertain no application coming from such a quarter."

"But will you permit me to explain what Mr. PUNCHINELLO intended by the
epithet 'scaly'? It was only his peculiar way of saying that an officer
appointed to administer the responsible duties of your august office
could not impartially do so without the 'Scales'--of Justice."

"Nonsense!" shouted the petulant old mackerel; and now I began to feel
"sassy."

"But you must admit, Mr. Secretary, that there is a great deal of sense
in Mr. PUNCHINELLO'S nonsense. He shoots folly as it flies, and yet it's
a great pity that he can't shoot all the fools."

"I am impressed with the truth of that remark, from the fact of his
sending you here," was the reply, delivered with an air and tone
intended to be witheringly sarcastic. That was enough for me, so I
dropped my gloves (metaphorically speaking) and went for him.

"Old man!" says I, "you were lifted out of the quiet of a happy home and
placed here, not so much by the act of our illustrious President as by
the dispensation of a mysterious Providence. 'Way down in Skewdunk they
held prayer-meetings when they heard that news, and a good many of them
haven't stopped praying yet. But only last week, let me tell you, Deacon
DRYASDUST wrote to General GRANT'S father, saying: 'JESSE, old boy,
there's no use praying for that venerable porgy any longer; he's worser
nor ever, and bound to drag LYSSES down to the bottom with him.' The
kind old man wrote back to the Deacon 'That's so, GILL, as sure as
pickled souse ain't pickled salmon.' And now, Mr. Secretary, I come to
the point. What old GILL DRYASDUST and JESSE GRANT think of you is what
the people think; and when PUNCHINELLO shoots at you an arrow now and
then, dipped in fun, and winged with satire, he does it in no spirit of
surly bitterness or spleen, but with a heart full of hope and charity,
and as much as says to the people of the United States, in your hearing:
'My good friends, keep on praying for brother FISH, and don't give him
up because some think him a "scaly" fellow.'"

Thus finishing this mingled admonition and explanation, I dropped a
single tear upon the figure worked in the carpet, and gloomily quitted
the apartment.

The next morning I found a letter upon the table, at my lodgings,
bearing the imprint of the Department of State, and couched in these
terms:

    Dear Sir: Instructions have been sent from this Department to
    Admiral POOR, commanding U. S. Squadron in Cuban waters to
    extend to American merchants engaged in establishing a trade in
    ant-eaters with the inhabitants of the South Sea Chickadiddle
    Islands, every protection consistent with his remaining where he
    now is.

    Very Respect'y,

    HAMILTON FISH.

All of which is respectfully submitted.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMIC ZOOLOGY.

ORDER, REPTILIA.--WORMS.

Worms are invertebral animals; in other words, they are backboneless,
but nevertheless some of them--for example the prickly caterpillars--are
full of spines. In Texas they call a chicken-snake seven feet long a
worm; but it would be just as reasonable to call the Rosse Telescope an
opera-glass.

The common earthworm is the most unfortunate variety of the species.
Beaks are always after him, and he is often taken up early in the
morning while lying perdue in the moist meadow grass. Earthworms are a
good bait for trout, but the highflyers of the gentle craft consider it
infra dig to dig them. Impaled on a hook, they are as lively as if on a
bender, and if thrown, in this condition, into a stream or pool, the
fish are apt to mistake them for their natural Grub. When quickly drawn
from the liquid element by the angler, they sometimes come up with a
single drop of water hanging to them, and sometimes--though more
rarely--with two Gills. The question whether the hook hurts them, or
only tickles till they squirm, is one of those knotty problems that
physiologists have failed to solve. COWPER, the poet, had a tenderness
for the earthworm. So also had IZAAK WALTON, who recommends that he be
skewered "tenderly, as if you loved him."

From the cradle to the grave, and even after we are deposited in the
latter, our bodies are liable to be infested with worms. There is the
trichina spiralis, which really exists, although the German
pork-butchers denounce the story as a "pig lie;" the ordinary intestinal
worm, which disports itself, eel-like, in the Alimentary Canal; and the
tape worm, of two varieties, one of which performs its circumlocutory
antics in the human stomach, and the other in the government Bureaux at
Washington. The worm that feeds on the cold meat of humanity, although
the most insignificant of reptiles, has one attribute of Diety. It is no
respecter of persons, and would as lief pick a bone in a royal vault as
in POTTER'S Field. All flesh is the same to it--unless saturated with
carbolic acid. It is said that all living things are propagated--that
the process of creation ceased ages ago; yet it is quite certain that
the worms known as maggots may be created by a blow. The most detestable
of all the vermicular tribe is the Worm of the Still, which is a sort of
caterer for the worm which never dieth--a reptile of another sphere,
that has never been described in Natural History. The only worm
recognized as edible by civilized man is produced in Italy and vulgarly
known as wormy-chilly. The subject is susceptible of further expansion,
but having run it into the ground, we here break it off.

       *       *       *       *       *

DUBIOUS ENGLISH.

The Paris correspondence of one of the city dailies has the following
terse, but somewhat equivocal statement:

  "Another murder of a brutal character is reported."

At the first glance one is inclined to wonder who the "brutal character"
was, whose violent death is thus referred to. On consideration, however,
it is possible to arrive at the conclusion that no particular character
is pointed at, but only a murder designated as brutal.

It is a way with newspaper correspondents to characterize some murders
as brutal, with the view, probably, of distinguishing them from
benignant murders, which, everybody knows, are of such frequent
occurrence.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A RURAL VIEW OF THE CENSUS.

_Farmer's Wife. (Who mistakes our Artist for a Census-taker.)_ "LOOK A'
HERE, MISTER, IF YOU'VE COME ALONG TO TAKE THE _senses_ OUT OF ME AND MY
OLD MAN, I'LL SET THE BULL-DORG ON TER YER!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

WESTERN NOMENCLATURE.

Closely allied to the study of history is that of the origin of names,
and there is in it a wonderful fascination. The following brief
statements will show from what a trifling incident a name may be
derived--especially a Western name.

Previous to 1831 there was nothing on the site where Chicago now stands
but an Indian post, which was driven into the ground at the corner of
Madison and Dearborn streets. The present post-office marks the spot and
commemorates the old name. About the year 1740 a party of adventurous
young ladies, belonging to a Michigan boarding-school, came across the
lake on an enormous raft. When they had bathed in the pellucid stream
that now pours its crystal waters into the lake, they started to return,
when a bad chief known as LONGJON referred to the departing maids as a
She-cargo. Hence the name.

There is another version of the origin of the city's name, which states
that a good Indian, named UNG KELL TOE BEE, when about to immolate a
fowl for his dinner on one occasion, repented of his murderous intent
and resolved to go hungry, exclaiming, as he let it fly, "Chicky-go!
there is room enough in the world for thee and me." The first story,
however, is best authenticated.

Michigan, as is now well known, is only a corruption of the name of
Father MIKE EGAN, an Irish Catholic priest, who lived and toiled, and
was finally sacrificed by the Indians, on the site of the present city
of Detroit.

Iowa is only a euphonious adaptation of the symbolic letters I.O.A.,
which the Surveyor-General of the United States, in 1835, ordered to
have inscribed on all the quarter-section posts in that territory. The
initials stood for the familiar Latin maxim, _Idoneus omnium audaces_,
which, freely translated, means "go in and win." Some emigrants saw the
cabalistic inscription all along the roadside, and they twisted the
initials into a name for their State. It was a happy thought.

The capital of Wisconsin derived its present name from a curious
circumstance that occurred in the time of the mound-builders, hundreds
of years before MCFARLAND went there to live. An architect saved a
woman's life, at the risk of his own, from a savage attack of
bears,--which made her husband furiously jealous. When he came home from
his mound-building, and ascertained what had been done, he sharpened his
trowel and went for the destroyer of his happiness. A medicine-man,
observing his momentary frenzy, grappled with and threw him, crying to
the neighbors, "Mad! ice on!" Ice was applied to his scalp, and the life
of his benefactor was saved. Ever since, the place has been called
Madison.

Milwaukee received its name from an eminent red predecessor of the
pedestrian WESTON. This tremendous strider was called, in his melodious
native tongue, "MILE-WALKEE"--because, to the infinite delight of his
trainer, HOR. SCREELEY--he could make a mile in four minutes, without
breaking.

The name of Superior was quite obscure in its origin, and the solution
only yielded to the most persistent and patient inquiry. Even CHARLEVOIX
does not mention it. It seems that the Chippewas who inhabit the
Southwestern shore of the Lake were formerly more wretched than now--the
squaws more ragged, and the pappooses more Squall�d; and when CARVER
came through he established a charity soup-house near the western
extremity. The beggarly braves flocked in with their gingerbread-colored
broods, and for months the benevolent sutler who was left in charge of
the establishment stood on a barrel-head and shouted daily to the
assembled thousands, "Soup! Here y'are!" This was taken up and corrupted
by the ignorant aborigines, and finally became Superior.

It is not necessary to say that Kenosha was named after the Western game
of "Keno," or that Winnipeg is a deduction of the pleasant game of
cribbage.

The origin of the name of Selma will be obvious to all thoughtful
readers who remember that it has been a notorious slave market.

Michillimackinac is an Indian name, and originated in a touching
dialogue between two little Pottawattomies in the dead of winter. One
baby complained that he was hungry, not having had a drop of dinner,
when the other calmly replied, "My-chilly-ma-can-ac-commodate-you." The
juvenile benevolence was so wonderful that it rendered the phrase
immortal, and the whole of it was made the name of a county in Michigan.
Of late years, however, this irreverent generation has lopped off the
last few syllables, spoiling the harmony of the expression, and entirely
sacrificing its affecting moral.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: MODERN MATRIMONY.

STERN WIFE. "NOW, JOHN. I HAVE TO LUNCH WITH SOROSIS AT THREE. AND SO I
LEAVE YOU TO WALK ABOUT THE SQUARE WITH THE BABY UNTIL I COME FOR YOU AT
FIVE."]

       *       *       *       *       *

HIRAM GREEN AT SARATOGA.


THE HOTELS--FASHIONS--SPRING WATER--AND CLUB HOUSE.

The season when everybody who can sport a 3 story trunk full of store
close, and a fine assortment of Californy diamonds, and rush to a
waterin' place, has got heer.

The venerable head of a family pegs away at biziness all winter, and
when summer comes his wife and dorters pile off to Niagary, Longbranch,
Saratogy, or somewhere else, where they make the Govenor's calf skin
wallet cry for quarter, as they rag out in their most celubrious manner.

I'm stoppin' heer at Saratogy, baskin', as it were, in the melliflous
sunshine of earth's fairest flowers.

That the reeders of PUNCHINELLO may understand how the season is openin'
heer, let an old Stateman, who has served his country for 4 years as
Gustise of the Peece, consine his thoughts and observashuns to paper.

The season is openin' rather encouragin'.

The only openin' I know of that can beat it, was openin' clams at a
clam-bake down at Coney Iland.

With Hotel proprieters heer it is a good deal like eatin' clams.

When a person has lickt out the meet of a clam he throws the shell away.

So it is with the a-4-sed Hotel Keeper. When he licks all the sweet meet
out of his border's calf-skin pocket-book, he has no further use for the
empty shell, and consekently chucks him out of the winder as lively as
Wall street hussles out a lame duck.

The biggest houses heer are the Congris and Union.

These institushins are to _terry fermer_, what NOER'S Ark and the grate
Eastern was to commerce.

These taverns, bein' mammoth, perserve their mammothness by chargin'
mammoth bord bills. Ten cents a breth and fifteen cents a sneeze, any
ordinary member of Congress can stand; but when a wooden tooth-pick
costs you Twenty-five cents, and a cleen napkin half a dollar, a visitor
size for an app'intment as Revenoo Officer in a good fat whiskey
district.

There is quite a heep of people at Congress haul.

This bildin' is surrounded by piazas, where the fare sects slam out,
araid in gushin' apparel and stoopin' and tremblin' under their lode of
false hair, like an Irishman under a hod full of bricks.

In this stoopin' posture their hands hangs down, and the picter seen in
nateral history, of a Kangeroo trying to stand ereckt, gives us what is
called the Greshun bend.

When the fair bell strikes an attitood, with fore paws danglin' at
half-mast, to be admired by a dandifide lot of Tommynoodles of the
opposite sects, the opinion of this ere cort is, that insted of Greshun
bend, it had orter be called Kangaroo bend.

I notis that old wimmin heer, as well as young ones, sport pretty
gorgeous harnesses. Last evenin' I was passin' a fashionable House heer
and I saw an anshient femail who was fixed with ribbins, satins, etc.
She looked like an advertisement for some glass factory, for she was
covered with a small waggin lode of glass diamonds.

She held a poodle purp in her lap. On her head was a lose nite cap from
which ringlets and spit curls was danglin', like a lot of fish-worms
crawlin' over the top of a bait box.

Thinks I, she was the old woman of the period and no mistake.

It is fashinable heer to go to the Springs and swill down Congress water
by the gallon--called Congress water from the fact that it will take the
kinks out of a Congressman's hair, mornin's, after indulgin' in a
shampain supper, and any Inn Keeper heer, altho' they theirselves may
have several diseases hitcht onto them, will assure yon that "Saratogy
waters is the waters of life," and is "a sertain cure for any disease
ever invented."

From my own observashuns it takes a person about 3 days to begin
relishin' Saratogy mineral water. The first day it tastes like the juice
of an old soked bute.

The second day it reminds you of brine out of an old musty pork barrel.

The third day it tastes like See water near a New York dock.

Afterwards it begins improvin' until bimebye I would as leave have it as
Gin and Tansy.

All the Springs heer are well patronized. Neerly as much so as the bars
at the Drinkin' Saloons.

The High Rock Spring is a first-class curiosity.

A good comfortable income could be got out of a quarry which prodooced
such stuns as the one from which High Rock water flows.

One of _the_ institushuns of this summer resort is Mister MORRISSEY'S
Club-house.

The Hon. JOHN is more of a success at Congress hauls, Saratogy, than he
is at the Halls of Congress, Washington, D.C.

When other members git on their high-heeled butes at Washington,
debatin' about the admishun of another State, JOHN'S voice is silent.

When debatin' the grate public question of

"Heads I win, tails you lose,"

JOHN is the most elokent man in Saratogy.

If any individual don't beleeve what I say, let him buck agin Mr. M.,
and he will diskiver that the product of his experience will "Bite like
a Jersey skeeter, and sting like one of Recorder HACKETT'S sentences."

As my wife's second cuzzin lives heer, I shall be heer occashonly
doorin' the summer seesun, a visitin' her.

I like it heer as a visitor--at Mrs. G's. cuzzin's house, altho', in her
eccentricity, she sumtimes doesn't have dinner while I am around, and
often she locks the door when I am out after dark.

I sometimes think her family would enjoy theirselves full as well if I
wasent there.

Still, that is their look-out, not mine.

A nawin' sensashun withinto me announces the hour of dinner. I must
close.

As NAPOLEON remarkt, when he herd that the _Plebiscotum_ had come out
ahead:

"_Rest a cat in pase, Hunc e doreo_" which is a furrin tongue.

Ewers,

HIRAM GEEEN, Esq.

_Lait Gustise of the Peece_.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.

_Bach_.--A courtship should continue at least two weeks before an offer
of marriage is made.

An engagement should not last longer than from two to five days;
marriage for an indefinite period.

We will answer your inquiries about divorce in our next.

_X.Y.Z_.--JACK is the common abbreviation for the name JOHN.

_R_.--If a man has a number of small children, (waifs,) would it be too
thin to call him a wafer?

_Answer_.--Are the children male or female?

_Cris Pin_.--We do not know that the Chinese have ever been
distinguished as manufacturers of shoes. It is possible, however, that
they excel in making slippers, as they are known to be a very slippery
people.

_Macaroni_.--You are right in supposing that the queer little birds by
which our parks have been enlivened for some few years past are
improperly called English sparrows. That they are German is obvious from
the fact of their preferring a Diet of Worms to any other kind of Grub.

_Canadian_ asks us three questions.--1st. Who were the MACDONALDS, when
Canada was discovered? 2nd. Who were the CARTIERS? 3d. Is the Government
of Ontario a Liberal Government?

_Answers_.--1st. The name is Italian; the founder of the family was
MACRINUS DIONALDI, (who came over with CARTIER,)--which became corrupted
by political influence to MACDONALD.--2nd. JACQUES CARTIER was the
discoverer of Canada, but the present CARTIER is no relation of
his.--3d. The term "Liberal," in connection with the Ontario Government,
is merely a figure of speech, as there is no liberality in the concern,
which is "run" by SANDFIELD MACDONALD on a cheap plan.

_A.B.C_. inquires how it is that the editor of the _Sun_ has allowed
that journal to become a vehicle of vituperation, respecting Messrs.
A.T. STEWART, RIDLEY, and other leading merchants of this city. To this
query we reply that the spots on the Sun are increasing so in number and
magnitude as to baffle our telescopic investigations. A suggestion in
the case is furnished, however, by the fact that the columns of the
_Sun_ are not lighted up with advertisements from any of the
establishments against which it has been discharging its meteoric
sneezes. And this may account for the dearth of the milk of journalistic
courtesy in the cocoa-nut of the DAN PHOEBUS who "runs the machine."

       *       *       *       *       *

"YOUNG'S NIGHT THOUGHTS."

The _Standard_ editorials.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "GONE TO GRASS."

_Edwin. (Popping the question_.) "WILL YOU, DEAREST ANGELINA, SAY, WILL
YOU--"

_Farmer. (Popping up his head_.) "GIT EOWT O' MY MEADOW, YEOU TWO--WILL
YEOU?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR CORRESPONDENCE BUREAU.

As everybody knows, PUNCHINELLO absolutely beams with benevolence toward
the human race, and a further proof of his disinterested and
self-sacrificing generosity is about to be displayed. PUNCHINELLO has
been pained to notice the wretched material with which, for want of a
well-posted New York correspondent, the country editor of the period
(amusing _sui generis_) is forced to fill his scanty columns under the
much-displayed caption, "Our New York Letter.--From Our Own
Correspondent." To obviate this difficulty, the following interesting
and important items of New York news, which are believed to have never
before been published, are gratuitously furnished, and the copyright
which applies to the rest of the paper is generously taken off from this
particular column.

PUNCHINELLO is forced to admit, with due humility, his unfitness to
embellish his letters with the gorgeous and pyrotechnic lavishness of
"fancy writing" which graces the letters of the New York Correspondents,
but he is sure that the items which follow are infinitely more truthful
than are the most of the statements furnished by those highly erudite
and ornamental gentlemen. And in infusing such an element of comparative
truthfulness into the current statements about New York city,
PUNCHINELLO experiences the proud satisfaction of having done his duty.

_Items_.--The recent unpleasantness between HUGH HASTINGS and THEODORE
TILTON has culminated in a duel with howitzers, in which the former had
his head carried away, and the latter had both legs shot off.

The fact has leaked out, that the recently reported BEETHOVEN Centennial
Jubilee was a myth. There is no such building in New York as was
described, and no concerts have taken place. The reports in the local
papers were written by unscrupulous Bohemians in the pay of the
musicians whom they puffed.

The New York police are notoriously inefficient. They are generally to
be found lying drunk across the sidewalk, and 623 carriages are sent
around every evening to gather them up.

HORACE GREELEY has joined the Red Stocking Base Ball Nine.

       *       *       *       *       *

A NOTE FROM THE ORCHESTRA.

I am a musician. I constitute one twenty-fourth of the orchestra at
BOOTH'S. I nightly blow the drum. Thus much by way of introduction to
the dear public, whose devoted servant I am, preliminary to a recital of
my woes. Whoever has been inside the theatre named has probably noticed
the peculiar construction, or rather location, of the enclosure wherein
we manipulators of melody are penned up. I know not what cause or
provocation the architect of BOOTH'S Theatre may have had, but certain
it is that he entertains a horrible spite against musicians. He may have
been distracted by diabolical hand-organs, or driven wild by bungling
buglists, but why should he include worthy and unoffending artists in
his hatred? The revenge of a BORGIA was not more terrible or cruel than
that of this architect. He has put the orchestra so far below the stage
that no part of the latter is visible to the poor musicians.

Fearful that some unusually tall one should catch an occasional glimpse
of the apex of some equally tall performer, he has made the front of the
stage project, like an overhanging Table Rock, above the devoted
orchestral heads. And there we sit, like a row of human Stoughton
bottles, having eyes, yet seeing not the plays that we hear enacted. I
am disgusted. I am mad about it. It is a way of "coming it over us,"
that is contemptible.

What I want to know is, how can I derive any satisfaction from HAMLET'S
death when I don't see him die? How can I sit quietly there and see the
audience go into convulsions over Major WELLINGTON DE BOOTS, when I can
by no possibility see the point of the joke?

Alas! There are no convulsions for me! Every night for two weeks has the
Huguenot slain the hectoring HECTOR, and I remain in blissful (no, not
blissful) ignorance of the manner of his taking off. It has gone far
past endurance, and I humbly trust that the public, or Mr. BERGH, or
somebody imbued with philanthropic feelings, will do something for that
suffering body--BOOTH'S orchestra.

A SUFFERER.

       *       *       *       *       *

People are dying of cholera in New York at the rate of 353 a day. Six
emigrant ships arrived this morning, having on board 374 cases of
small-pox, 685 of cholera, and 897 of yellow fever. No alarm is yet
felt, however.

       *       *       *       *       *

A MIGHTY MODERN JEHU.

We learn from newspapers that Mrs. GEORGE FRANCIS TRAIN drives a
splendid four-in-hand turnout at Newport.

Well, Mr. GEORGE FRANCIS TRAIN has been driving four-in-hand, too, for
years past, and the names of his horses-are Fenianism, Buncombe, GEORGE
FRANCIS TRAIN, and Blatheremskite.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SEASONABLE.

THE HAIRY CATERPILLAR STYLE OF HEAD-DRESS.]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PLAYS AND SHOWS.

[Illustration: 'O']

Of a certainty Mr. WATTS PHILLIPS made a mistake when he fancied himself
a dramatist. Possibly he may have inherited some small share of the
poetical talent of his well-known maternal grandfather,--the author of
"Divine and Moral Songs for Children," but he has shown no sign of the
eminent histrionic genus which has made his elder brother, Mr. WENDELL
PHILLIPS, so popular a Reformer. Still, if he was bent upon writing
plays he should have confined himself to dramatizing the more quiet and
domestic of Dr. WATTS'S poems. "How doth the little busy bee"--for
example--could have been turned into quite a nice little five-act drama,
had Mr. PHILLIPS condescended to grapple with so simple a subject. But
no, he must indulge in battles, and Sepoys, and Butchers of St.
BARTHOLOMEW, and dancing girls and things. He will write sensational
plays, let the consequences be what they may. Hence we are made to
suffer from _Not Guilty, The Huguenot_, and similar harrowing
spectacles. The _Huguenot_, which has just died a lingering death at
BOOTH'S Theatre, is an aggravated case of dramatic misdemeanor on the
part of the author, since it is wantonly stretched out into five acts,
when it could properly be compressed into three. A strict compliance
with the old maxim, "_De mortuis nil desperandum nisi prius_," (I
haven't quite forgotten my Latin yet,) would oblige me to refrain from
abusing it, now that it is happily dead; but, as another proverb puts
it, "The law knows no necessity," and I therefore can do as I choose.
Here, then, is its corpse, exhumed as a warning to those who may be
about to witness any other of Mr. PHILLIPS'S dramas. I flatter myself
that the disinterested public will agree with me, that if all the
Huguenots were as tedious as Mr. WATTS PHILLIPS'S private _Huguenot_,
the massacre of St. BARTHOLOMEW was a pleasing manifestation of a very
natural and commendable indignation on the part of their much-suffering
fellow-citizens not of Protestant descent.

ACT I.--_Scene, a tavern in the outskirts of Paris_. RENE, _the
Huguenot, is pretending to sleep on an uncomfortable wooden bench. A
drunken villain insults a lovely gipsy_. RENE _gets up and kills him,
and escapes his pursuers by falling over a convenient precipice.
Curtain_.

Mr. WALLER. (_Soliloquizing behind the scene_.) "To-morrow I'll have a
comfortable bench to sleep on, if I have to take MACGONIGLE'S sofa. I
won't play RENE again if I have to lie for twenty minutes on that
infamous board bench!"

COMIC MAN. (_Who is believed to read_ HARPER'S "_Drawer_.'") "You know
WATTS PHILLIPS is a grandson of old Dr. WATTS. Now here's a genealogical
joke. If TOM'S father is DICK'S son, what relation is DICK to TOM?"

ACCOMPANYING FRIEND. "Nephew? niece? mother-in-law?--I give it up!"

COMIC MAN. "I thought you would. Well, he is--Upon my word I forget the
answer, but it's a first rate one. I've got it down at the office,
anyhow!"

ACT II.--_Scene, the interior of a Duchess's drawing-room. Enter_ RENE
_through the window_.

RENE. "I have killed a man and am pursued. Save me!"

DUCHESS. (_Aside_.) "Perhaps he is an influential politician, and may
get my son an office in the Street Department." To RENE.--"Sir, I will
save you. Get behind the curtain." (_Enter mob of drunken soldiers_.)

FIRST SOLDIER. "Your Grace's son has just been killed. I see the
murderer's legs behind the curtain."

DUCHESS. "You can't have him, for I have promised to save him. Get out,
the whole lot of you. Come here, you murderous wretch. I've saved you
this time, but I won't do it again. Here comes the officer to seize
you." (_He is seized. Curtain_.)

FIRST CRITICAL PERSON. "How do you like it?"

SECOND CRITICAL PERSON. "I hardly think the unities are fixed up just
the way they should be, but the scenery is fair, and WALLER isn't so
bad."

COMIC PERSON. "Now here's another joke which you can't guess. Said a
little four-year-old boy, 'My father and mother have a daughter who is
not my sister.' Now what relation was she to the boy?"

ACCOMPANYING FRIEND. (_Looking in vain for a policeman, but finding
None_.) "I don't know, I'm sure."

COMIC PERSON. "Give it up, do you? Why, she was his sister; the boy
lied, you see. Ha! ha! ha!"

ACT III.--_Scene, the outside of a prison in which_ RENE _is confined. A
confederate breaks in and sets it on fire_. RENE _escapes. Curtain_.

YOUNG LADY. "Pa, why did you come here, if you intended to sleep all the
time, and never speak a word to me."

PA. "Because, my dear, I am troubled with inability to sleep. Morphine
won't help me, but WATTS PHILLIPS will. My physician tells me that he
always prescribes one of PHILLIPS'S plays in cases like mine."

COMIC PERSON. "Now here's another one. This will tickle you, for it's
first rate. You ought to read the "Drawer," and remember the anecdotes,
so that you can repeat them when you're in company. That's the way I get
up all the good things I say. O! this is the question I was going to ask
you. Said a man, 'Father and mother have I none, but this--'"

ACCOMPANYING FRIEND. (_With great precipitation_.) "Excuse me, but I see
a friend in a box whom I must speak to." (_Flies_.)

COMIC PERSON. "Never mind, I'll tell it to the usher the first time he
comes this way."

ACT IV.--RENE _is discovered, disguised as a monk_.

RENE. "The hounds of justice dog me. Therefore I will keep in their way
until I have seen the lovely niece of the Duchess. She must love me when
she learns that I have killed her cousin." _Curtain_.

ONE-HALF OF THE AUDIENCE. "Is that really the whole of the act?"

THE OTHER HALF. "Thank goodness! it really is."

ACT V.--_Scene, the palace of the Duchess. Enter_ RENE _and the_ LOVELY
NIECE.

RENE. "The hounds of justice are laying for me just outside the door.
Fly with me, my beloved!" (_Enter the_ DUCHESS.)

DUCHESS. "She will not fly if I am at all acquainted with myself.
Gyurll, this fellow murdered my son, and I will give him up to justice."
(_Enter_ COURT PHYSICIAN.)

COURT PHYSICIAN. "Your Grace is mistaken. True, your son lay dead for a
month or two, but by a judicious application of four dozen bottles of my
"Universal Hair Restorer and Consumption Cure," he has recovered. Here
he comes."

DUCHESS. "'Tis he! 'Tis my son, though rather thin about the legs. RENE,
I forgive you. Marry the gyurrll if you wish. Bless you, my children."
_Curtain_.

FIRST USHER. "Go round, somebody, and wake the people up. If you don't,
they'll sit here and snore all night"

SECOND USHER. "No they won't. They'll wake up, now the play is over."

And the event proves that he is right. Slowly and gapingly the audience
arises, strolls sleepily out of the door, and entering wrong stages, is
carried to all manner of wrong destinations. So strong is the soporific
influence of the Phillipic drama, that not until hours after the play is
over, does the average spectator become sufficiently wakeful to express
an intelligible regret that Mr. WALLER and Mrs. MOLLENHAUER should not
have made their reappearance on the stage in some drama in which they
could have had an opportunity to act, and in which the public could have
taken some little interest.

MATADOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR FILTHY LUCRE.

Messrs. BROCKWAY, brewers, have lately been subjected to law process for
the impropriety of "cleansing" revenue stamps connected with the ale
business, with the view of using them over again.

In one point of view there seems to have been a hardship in the case
referred to. Millions of people are daily occupied in dirtying our
lovely currency stamps, as well as in "using them over again," and yet
nobody has ever been "brought up" for the diabolical act.

       *       *       *       *       *

INTERESTING TO INVESTOR.

Weekly meetings are being held by the Department of Docks, to hear
suggestions from inventors. It is expected, of course, that the latter
will be willing to be tried by their Piers.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THESE TWO PICTURES.

THIS IS A YOUNG MAN GETTING READY FOR A PARTY.

AND THIS IS A PARTY GETTING READY FOR A YOUNG MAN.]

       *       *       *       *       *

SOCIETY, ETC.

It is rather a pleasing recreation, when no other is at hand, to read
the letters of some of the New York correspondents who do the heavy
Trite and the small Horrible for the outside barbaric folios. Standing
on the shore of their Firth of Froth, so to speak, we watch with
considerable interest the unique soarings and divings of "Our Own." One
of these writers informs the readers of a Boston paper that "There is a
great deal of business talent in New York," and that "There is a great
deal of what is called fashionable society in New York." _There_ is
wisdom in solid chunks. It is highly important that such facts as these
should be stated seriously in State street and be conned in Beacon
street. "Our Own," be it remembered, is speaking of the "Tone of
Society," and he proceeds to remark, with great pertinence, that in our
unfortunate city, "There is a coarse, rude, uncivil way of doing
business, so general as to attract attention. If you do not take a hack
at the impertinent solicitation of the driver, he will unquestionably
curse you." "The telegraph operator grabs your message and eyes you as
if you were a pickpocket." Now, Mr. PUNCHINELLO does not offer himself
as an apologist for the abusive and obstreperous hackman, but he wishes
to say that in the course of his active and eventful career he has had
various conferences with those servants of the sidewalk, and he has
never yet been unquestionably cursed by any one of the whole bad lot.
Only yesterday he had occasion to intimate to one of these tide-waiters,
that vehicular aid was not desired. There was a merry twinkle in the eye
of the Rejected, and he added, as an additional persuader, "Baggage
Smashed!" Mr. PUNCHINELLO felt gratified at sincerity in an unexpected
direction.

"Our correspondent" is also exercised on the old-time grievance of
ladies in the horse-cars. He declares that "It is the rarest thing in
the world for a New York lady to return the slightest acknowledgement
for a seat tendered to her. She takes the seat as if it were her right,
_and gives the gentleman a withering look for his impertinence in being
in it when she entered_."

PUNCHINELLO has been more fortunate. He has been crowded by sitters, and
punched with umbrellas; his eloquent nose has been offended by filthy
straw, full often, in his Avenue travel, until he hopes fervently that
we may have a new method of getting up and down town; it isn't pleasant
to be _knocked_ down; but he has never yet been _withered_.

Oh, no. He does not require a lady to genuflect before him to show her
appreciation of a gentlemanly act. Mr. PUNCHINELLO, being a gentleman of
the old school, and of several colleges and universities, is quite
satisfied by a nod and a smile, or "Thank you." And one or the other he
is pretty certain to receive. He never encounters the withering look
which madam gives to other men to mad 'em. But alas for "our own"
unlucky correspondent!

PUNCHINELLO has often had occasion to confer with the gentlemen who
"blow messages on the hollow wire," as they say out at Fort
Laramie,--but he disclaims ever having been looked upon as a
pick-pocket. Behold his smiling face and say if any telegraph operator
could be so slow as to believe him a fingerer of other men's fobs.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMERCIAL CON.

Why does the Ocean Commerce of America remind one of the railings of a
gallery? Because, just now, it is simply Ballast Trade.

       *       *       *       *       *

"THEREBY HANGS A TAIL."

A citizen of Dubuque is said by a newspaper itemizer to have lately
developed a tail. We do not believe it; but that the author of the story
is a tale-bearer, himself, is a matter beyond question.

BOOK NOTICES.

ANTONIA. A Novel. By GEORGE SAND. Boston: ROBERTS BROTHERS.

The popularity of Madame DUDEVANT'S writings is now at its zenith, and
the present volume is a very welcome addition to those already so well
set forth by Messrs. ROBERTS. It has been translated into excellent
idiomatic English by Miss VIRGINIA VAUGHAN.

POEMS. By DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI. Boston: ROBERTS BROTHERS.

Comparatively new to the public as a poet, Mr. D. G. ROSSETTI has yet
evinced so much of the poetic fire in his contributions to magazine
literature, from time to time, as to warrant the reproduction of them in
book form, and this has been done in a very tasteful manner by Messrs.
ROBERTS.

By an error in our notice of "The Men who Advertise," (see PUNCHINELLO
No. 13,) the name of the publishers of that useful volume, Messrs. G.P.
ROWELL & Co., was omitted.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. T. Stewart & Co.

Offer & Large Stock of

BROCHE GRENADINES,

At 12-1/2 cents per yard, recently sold at 25 cents.


Broche Grenadine

At 20 cents per yard, reduced from 30 cents.


_THREE CASES_.

Black Ground Grenadines,

Embroidered, with Silk Bouquet, EXTRA RICH, 50
cents per yard, value $1.


TWO CASES

Striped Japanese Silks,
Extra heavy, only $1 per yard.


ONE CASE MAGNIFICENT AND STYLISH
SASH RIBBONS.


A Choice Assortment of
Crepe de Chene,

In the latest Paris colors, for Dresses and Millinery
purposes.

GREAT REDUCTIONS

Will be made in their Stocks of
Hosiery, Printed Jaconets, Organdies.
Percales, &c.

BROADWAY,
4th Avenue, 9th and l0th Streets.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. T. STEWART & Co.

Have largely replenished with

NOVELTIES.

Their Stock of

Silks, Dress Goods.

Linen, Lawn and Organdie
DRESSES.


Misses' and Children's
Ready-Made Garments and Underwear.
Llama Lace Shawls, Jackets, &c.

BROADWAY,
4th Avenue, 9th and 10th Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. T. Stewart & Co.

Have received and opened

4 Cases Extra Quality
Black Iron Grenadine,
Price 75c. per yard, upwards. Also,

2 Cases
Colored Iron Grenadines,
50c. per yard, upwards.

2 Cases
Colored Trimming Satins,
In all the scarce shades of color.

1 Case Extra Rich
Sash Ribbons, Neckties, Bonnet Ribbons,
ETC., ETC.,

BROADWAY,
4th Avenue, 9th and 10th Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Extraordinary Bargains.

A. T. Stewart & Co.

Offer at Less than One-Half their Cost,

Paris and Domestic Made Silk,
Barege, Organdie and Tulle
DRESSES,

VERY SLIGHTLY INJURED,

Suitable for Street or Evening wear.

The above will be exhibited in the section of the
Second story next to the corner of Broadway and 9th Street.

BROADWAY,
4th Ave., 9th and 10th Sts.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUNCHINELLO.

The first number of this Illustrated Humorous and Satirical Weekly
Paper was issued under date of April 2, 1870. The Press and the Public
in every State and Territory of the Union endorse it as the best paper
of the kind ever published in America.

CONTENTS ENTIRELY ORIGINAL.

Subscription for one year, (with $200 premium,)               $400
          "            "  six months, (without premium,)       200
          "            "  three months,   "       "            100
Single copies mailed free, for                                  10

We offer the following elegant premiums of L. PRANG & CO'S CHROMOS
for subscriptions as follows:

A copy of paper for one year, and

"The Awakening," (a Litter of Puppies.) Half chromo. Size 8 3-8 by
11 1-8 ($2.00 picture,) for $4.00

A copy of paper for one year and either of the following $3.00 chromos:

Wild Roses. 12-1/8 x 9.

Dead Game. 11-1/8 x 8-5/8.

Easter Morning 6-3/4 x 10-1/4 for $5.00

A copy of paper for one year and either of the following $5.00 chromos:

Group of Chickens; Group of Ducklings; Group of Quails. Each 10 x 12-1/8.

The Poultry Yard. 10-1/8 x 14.

The Barefoot Boy; Wild Fruit. Each 9-3/4 x 13.

Pointer and Quail; Spaniel and Woodcock. 10 x 12 for $6.50

A copy of paper for one year and either of the following $6.00 chromos:

The Baby in Trouble; The Unconscious Sleeper; The Two Friends. (Dog and
Child.) Each 13 x 16-1/4.

Spring; Summer; Autumn; 12-7/8 x 16-1/8

The Kid's Play Ground. 11 x 17-1/2 for $7.00

A copy of paper for one year and either of the following $7.50 chromos:

Strawberries and Baskets.

Cherries and Baskets.

Currants. Each 13x18.

Horses in a Storm. 22-1/4 x 15-1/4.

Six Central Park Views. (A set.) 9-1/8 x 4-1/2 for $8.00

A copy of paper for one year and

Six American Landscapes. (A set.) 4-3/8 x 9, price $9.00 for $9.00

A copy of paper for one year and either of the following $10 chromos:

Sunset in California. (Bierstadt.) 18-1/8 x 12

Easter Morning. 14 x 21.

Corregio's Magdalen. 12-1/2 x 16-3/8.

Summer Fruit, and Autumn Fruit. (Half chromos,) 15-1/2 x 10-1/2,
(companions, price $10.00 for the two), for $10.00.

Remittances should be made in P.0. Orders, Drafts, or Bank Checks
on New York, or Registered letters. The paper will be sent from the
first number, (April 2d, 1870,) when not otherwise ordered.

Postage of paper is payable at the office where received, twenty
cents per year, or five cents per quarter, in advance; the CHROMOS
will be _mailed free_ on receipt of money.

CANVASSERS WANTED, to whom liberal commissions will be given. For
special terms address the Company.

The first ten numbers will be sent to any one desirous of seeing the
paper before subscribing, for SIXTY CENTS. A specimen copy sent to any
one desirous of canvassing or getting up a club, on receipt of postage
stamp.

Address,

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,

P.O. Box 2783.

No. 83 Nassau Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUNCHINELLO.

[ILLUSTRATION:  REFLECTION BY A 'LONGSHORE MAN.

"WHILE THERE IS LESS RESTRAINT AT CONEY ISLAND THAN AT MOST OTHER
WATERING-PLACES, YET, IF YOU PUT YOUR HEAD OUT OF SIGHT FOR A MOMENT,
YOUR FEET ARE IN DANGER OF BECOMING A FOUNDATION FOR A MUD PALACE."]

            *          *          *          *          *

PRANG'S CHROMOS are celebrated for their close resemblance to Oil
Paintings.  sold in all Art and Bookstores throughout the world.

PRANG'S LATEST CHROMOS: "Flowers of Hope," "Flowers of Memory."
Illustrated Catalogues sent free on receipt of stamp.

L. PRANG & CO., Boston

            *          *          *          *          *

"The Printing House of the United States."

GEO. F. NESBITT & CO.,

General JOB PRINTERS,

BLANK BOOK Manufacturers,
STATIONERS Wholesale and Retail,
LITHOGRAPHIC Engravers and Printers,
COPPER-PLATE Engravers and Printers,
CARD Manufacturers,
ENVELOPE Manufacturers,
FINE CUT and COLOR Printers.

163, 165, 167, and 169 PEARL ST.,
73, 75, 77, and 79 PINE ST., New-York.

ADVANTAGES. --> All on the same premises, and under
immediate supervision of the proprietors.

           *          *          *          *          *

TO NEWS-DEALERS.

PUNCHINELLO'S MONTHLY.

The Weekly Numbers for June,

Bound in a Handsome Cover,

Is now ready.  Price Fifty Cents.

THE TRADE

Supplied by the

AMERICAN NEWS COMPANY,

Who are now prepared to receive Orders.

       *       *       *       *       *

The New York Standard.

A Daily Morning Newspaper.

CONTAINING ALL THE NEWS

Single Copies, TWO CENTS.
Subscription Price, $6 a Year.

Published Every Morning, except Sundays,

at 34 PARK ROW, by

JOHN RUSSELL YOUNG.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bowling Green Savings-Bank,

33 BROADWAY,

NEW-YORK.

Open Every Day from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.


_Deposit of any sum from Ten Cents to Ten
Thousand Dollars, will be received._


Six Per Cent Interest, Free of Government Tax.


INTEREST ON NEW DEPOSITS

Commences on the first of every month.

HENRY SMITH, _President_.

REEVES E. SELMES, _Secretary_.

WALTER ROCHE,)
EDWARD HOGAN,) _Vice-Presidents_.

       *       *       *       *       *

APPLICATIONS FOR ADVERTISING IN

"PUNCHINELLO"

SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO

J. NICKINSON,

ROOM NO. 4,

NO. 83 Nassau Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MYSTERY OF MR. E. DROOD.

The New Burlesque Serial,

Written expressly for PUNCHINELLO,

BY

ORPHEUS C. KERR,

Commenced in No. 11, will be continued weekly throughout the year.

A sketch of the eminent author, written by his bosom friend, with superb
illustrations of

1ST. THE AUTHOR'S PALATIAL RESIDENCE AT BEGAD'S HILL, TICKNOR'S FIELDS,
NEW JERSEY.

2D. THE AUTHOR AT THE DOOR OF SAID PALATIAL RESIDENCE, taken as he
appears "Every Saturday," will also be found in the same number.


_Single Copies, for sale by all newsmen, (or mailed from this office,
free,) Ten Cents.

Subscription for One Year, one copy, with $2 Chromo Premium, $4.


Those desirous of receiving the paper containing this new serial, which
promises to be the best ever written by ORPHEUS C. KERR, should subscribe
now, to insure its regular receipt weekly.

We will send the first Ten Numbers of PUNCHINELLO to any one who wishes
to see them, in view of subscribing, on the receipt of SIXTY CENTS.

Address,

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY,

P. O. Box 2783. 83 Nassau. St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

Geo. W. Wheat, Printer, No. 8 Spruce Street.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punchinello, Vol. 1, No. 16, July 16,
1870, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCHINELLO, JULY 16, 1870 ***

***** This file should be named 9877-8.txt or 9877-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/8/7/9877/

Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Sandra
Brown and PG Distributed Proofreaders


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
