The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and
Instruction, Vol. 10, Issue 264, July 14, 1827, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and Instruction, Vol. 10, Issue 264, July 14, 1827

Author: Various

Posting Date: December 5, 2011 [EBook #9884]
Release Date: February, 2006
First Posted: October 27, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MIRROR OF LITERATURE, JULY 14, 1827 ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram and Project Gutenberg
Distributed Proofreaders











THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT, AND INSTRUCTION.

VOL. 10, No. 264.] SATURDAY, JULY 14, 1827. [PRICE 2d.



       *       *       *       *       *



ARCHITECTURAL ILLUSTRATIONS.


NEW CHURCH, REGENT'S PARK.

[Illustration]


The architectural splendour which has lately developed itself in and
about the precincts of the parish of St. Mary-le-Bonne, exhibits a most
surprising and curious contrast with the former state of this part of
London; and more particularly when compared with accounts extracted from
newspapers of an early date.

Mary-le-Bonne parish is estimated to contain more than ten thousand
houses, and one hundred thousand inhabitants. In the plans of London, in
1707, it was a small village one mile distant from the Metropolis,
separated by fields--the scenes of robbery and murder. The following
from a newspaper of 1716:--"On Wednesday last, four gentlemen were
robbed and stripped in the fields between Mary-le-Bonne and London." The
"Weekly Medley," of 1718, says, "Round about the New Square which is
building near Tyburn road, there are so many other edifices, that a
whole magnificent city seems to be risen out of the ground in a way
which makes one wonder how it should find a new set of inhabitants. It
is said it is to be called by the name of _Hanover Square!_ On the other
side is to be built another square, called Oxford Square." From the same
article I have also extracted the dates of many of the different
erections, which may prove of benefit to your architectural readers, as
tending to show the progressive improvement made in the private
buildings of London, and showing also the style of building adopted at
later periods. Indeed, I would wish that some of your correspondents--
_F.R.Y._, or _P.T.W._, for instance, would favour us with a _list of
dates_ answering this purpose. Rathbone-place and John-street (from
Captain Rathbone) began 1729. Oxford market opened 1732. Newman-street
and Berners-street, named from the builders, between 1723 and 1775.
Portland-place and street, 1770. Portman-square, 1764. Portman-place,
1770. Stratford-place, five years later, on the site of Conduit Mead,
built by Robert Stratford, Esq. This had been the place whereon stood
the banquetting house for the lord mayor and aldermen, when they visited
the neighbouring nine conduits which then supplied the city with water.
Cumberland-place, 1769. Manchester-square the year after.

Previous to entering upon an architectural description of the superb
buildings recently erected in the vicinity of Regency Park, I shall
confine myself at present to that object that first arrests the
attention at the entrance, which is the church; it has been erected
under the commissioners for building new churches. The architect is J.
Soane, Esq. There is a pleasing originality in this gentleman's
productions; the result of extensive research among the architectural
beauties of the ancients, together with a peculiar happy mode of
distributing his lights and shadows; producing in the greatest degree
picturesque effect: these are peculiarities essentially his own, and
forming in no part a copy of the works of any other architect in the
present day. The church in question by no means detracts from his merit
in these particulars. The principal front consists of a portico of four
columns of the Ionic order, approached by a small flight of steps; on
each side is a long window, divided into two heights by a stone transum
(panelled). Under the lower window is a raised panel also; and in the
flank of the building the plinth is furnished with openings; each of the
windows is filled with ornamental iron-work, for the purpose of
ventilating the vaults or catacombs. The flank of the church has a
central projection, occupied by antae, and six insulated Ionic columns;
the windows in the inter-columns are in the same style as those in
front; the whole is surmounted by a balustrade. The tower is in two
heights; the lower part has eight columns of the Corinthian order.
Example taken from the temple of Vesta, at Tivoli; these columns, with
their stylobatï¿½ and entablature, project, and give a very extraordinary
relief in the perspective view of the building. The upper part consists
of a circular peristyle of six columns; the example apparently taken
from the portico of the octagon tower of Andronicus Cyrrhestes, or tower
of the winds, from the summit of which rises a conical dome, surmounted
by the Vane. The more minute detail may be seen by the annexed drawing.
The prevailing ornament is the Grecian fret.

Mr. Soane, during his long practice in the profession, has erected very
few churches, and it appears that he is endeavouring to rectify failings
that seem insurmountable in the present style of architecture,--that of
preventing the tower from having the appearance of rising out of the
roof, by designing his porticos without pediments; if this is the case,
he certainly is indebted to a great share of praise, as a pediment will
always conceal (particularly at a near view) the major part of a tower.
But again, we find ourselves in another difficulty, and it makes the
remedy as bad as the disease,--that of taking away the principal
characteristic of a portico, (namely, the pediment), and destroying at
once the august appearance which it gives to the building; we find in
all the churches of Sir Christopher Wren the campanile to form a
distinct projection from the ground upwards; thus assimilating nearer to
the ancient form of building them entirely apart from the main body of
the church. I should conceive, that if this idea was followed by
introducing the beautiful detail of Grecian architecture, according to
Wren's _models_ it would raise our church architecture to a very
superior pitch of excellence.

In my next I shall notice the interior, and also the elevation towards
the altar.

C. DAVY.

_Furnivals' Inn_,

_July 1, 1827._

       *       *       *       *       *



THE MONTHS

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SEASON.


The heat is greatest in this month on account of its previous duration.
The reason why it is less so in August is, that the days are then much
shorter, and the influence of the sun has been gradually diminishing.
The farmer is still occupied in getting the productions of the earth
into his garners; but those who can avoid labour enjoy as much rest and
shade as possible. There is a sense of heat and quiet all over nature.
The birds are silent. The little brooks are dried up. The earth is
chapped with parching. The shadows of the trees are particularly
grateful, heavy, and still. The oaks, which are freshest because latest
in leaf, form noble clumpy canopies; looking, as you lie under them, of
a strong and emulous green against the blue sky. The traveller delights
to cut across the country through the fields and the leafy lanes, where,
nevertheless, the flints sparkle with heat. The cattle get into the
shade or stand in the water. The active and air-cutting-swallows, now
beginning to assemble for migration, seek their prey about the shady
places; where the insects, though of differently compounded natures,
"fleshless and bloodless," seem to get for coolness, as they do at other
times for warmth. The sound of insects is also the only audible thing
now, increasing rather than lessening the sense of quiet by its gentle
contrast. The bee now and then sweeps across the ear with his gravest
tone. The gnats

    "Their murmuring small trumpets sounden wide:"--SPENSER.

and here and there the little musician of the grass touches forth his
tricksy note.

    The poetry of earth is never dead;
    When all the birds are faint with the hot sun,
    And hide in cooling trees, a voice will run
    From hedge to hedge about the new-mown mead:
    That is the grasshopper's.[1]

    [1] _Poems_, by John Keats, p. 93.

The strong rains, which sometimes come down in summer-time, are a noble
interruption to the drought and indolence of hot weather. They seem as
if they had been collecting a supply of moisture equal to the want of
it, and come drenching the earth with a mighty draught of freshness. The
rushing and tree-bowing winds that precede them, the dignity with which
they rise in the west, the gathering darkness of their approach, the
silence before their descent, the washing amplitude of their
out-pouring, the suddenness with which they appear to leave off, taking
up, as it were, their watery feet to sail onward, and then the sunny
smile again of nature, accompanied by the "sparkling noise" of the
birds, and those dripping diamonds the rain-drops;--there is a grandeur
and a beauty in all this, which lend a glorious effect to each other;
for though the sunshine appears more beautiful than grand, there is a
power, not even to be looked upon, in the orb from which it flows; and
though the storm is more grand than beautiful, there is always beauty
where there is so much beneficence.--_The Months_.


BATHING


It is now the weather for bathing, a refreshment too little taken in
this country, either summer or winter. We say in winter, because with
very little care in placing it near a cistern, and having a leathern
pipe for it, a bath may be easily filled once or twice a week with warm
water; and it is a vulgar error that the warm bath relaxes. An excess,
either warm or cold, will relax, and so will any other excess; but the
sole effect of the warm bath moderately taken is, that it throws off the
bad humours of the body by opening and clearing the pores. As to summer
bathing, a father may soon teach his children to swim, and thus perhaps
may be the means of saving their lives some day or other, as well as
health. Ladies also, though they cannot bathe in the open air, as they
do in some of the West Indian islands and other countries, by means of
natural basins among the rocks, might oftener make a substitute for it
at home in tepid baths. The most beautiful aspects under which Venus has
been painted or sculptured have been connected with bathing; and indeed
there is perhaps no one thing that so equally contributes to the three
graces of health, beauty, and good temper; to health, in putting the
body into its best state; to beauty, in clearing and tinting the skin;
and to good temper, in rescuing the spirits from the irritability
occasioned by those formidable personages, "the nerves," which nothing
else allays in so quick and entire a manner. See a lovely passage on the
subject of bathing in Sir Philip Sydney's "Arcadia," where "Philoclea,
blushing, and withal smiling, makeing shamefastnesse pleasant, and
pleasure shamefast, tenderly moved her feet, unwonted to feel the naked
ground, until the touch of the cold water made a pretty kind of
shrugging come over her body; like the twinkling of the fairest among
the fixed stars."--_Ibid_.


INSECTS


Insects now take the place of the feathered tribe, and, being for the
most part hatched in the spring, they are now in full vigour. It is a
very amusing sight in some of our rural rambles, in a bright evening
after a drizzling summer shower, to see the air filled throughout all
its space with sportive organized creatures, the leaf, the branch, the
bark of the tree, every mossy bank, the bare earth, the pool, the ditch,
all teeming with animal life; and the mind that is ever framed for
contemplation, must awaken now in viewing such a profusion and variety
of existence. One of those poor little beings, the fragile _gnat_,
becomes our object of attention, whether we regard its form or peculiar
designation in the insect world; we must admire the first, and
innocently, perhaps, conjecture the latter. We know that Infinite
Wisdom, which formed, declared it "to be very good;" that it has its
destination and settled course of action, admitting of no deviation or
substitution: beyond this, perhaps, we can rarely proceed, or, if we
sometimes advance a few steps more, we are then lost in the mystery with
which the incomprehensible Architect has thought proper to surround it.
So little is human nature permitted to see, (nor perhaps is it capable
of comprehending much more than permitted,) that it is blind beyond
thought as to secondary causes; and admiration, that pure fountain of
intellectual pleasure, is almost the only power permitted to us. We see
a wonderfully fabricated creature, decorated with a vest of glorious art
and splendour, occupying almost its whole life in seeking for the most
fitting station for its own necessities, exerting wiles and stratagems,
and constructing a peculiar material to preserve its offspring against
natural or occasional injury, with a forethought equivalent to
reason--in a moment, perhaps, with all its splendour and instinct, it
becomes the prey of some wandering bird! and human wisdom and conjecture
are humbled to the dust. We can "see but in part," and the wisest of us
is only, perhaps, something less ignorant than another. This sense of a
perfection so infinitely above us, is the _natural_ intimation of a
Supreme Being; and as science improves, and inquiry is augmented, our
imperfections and ignorance will become more manifest, and all our
aspirations after knowledge only increase in us the conviction of
knowing nothing. Every deep investigator of nature can hardly be
possessed of any other than a humble mind.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE PEACOCK.

(_For the Mirror._)


Of this bird, there are several species, distinguished by their
different colours. The male of the common kind is, perhaps, the most
gaudy of all the bird-kind; the length and beauty of whose tail, and the
various forms in which the creature carries it, are sufficiently known
and admired among us. India is, however, his native country; and there
he enjoys himself with a sprightliness and gaiety unknown to him in
Europe. The translators of Hindoo poetry concur in their description of
his manners; and is frequently alluded to by the Hindoo poets.

    "Dark with her varying clouds, and peacocks gay."

It is affirmed, among the delightful phenomena which are observable at
the commencement of the rainy season, (immediately following that of the
withering hot winds,) the joy displayed by the peacocks is one of the
most pleasing. These birds assemble in groups upon some retired spot of
verdant grass; jump about in the most animated manner, and make the air
re-echo with their cheerful notes.

    "Or can the peacock's animated hail."

The wild peacock is also exceedingly abundant in many parts of
Hindoostan, and is especially found in marshy places. The habits of this
bird are in a great measure aquatic; and the setting in of the rains is
the season in which they pair; the peacock is, therefore, always
introduced in the description of cloudy or rainy weather. Thus, in a
little poem, descriptive of the rainy season, &c., the author says,
addressing his mistress,--

    "Oh, thou, whose teeth enamelled vie
      With smiling _Cunda's_ pearly ray,
    Hear how the peacock's amorous cry
      Salutes the dark and cloudy day."

And again, where he is describing the same season:--

    "When smiling forests, whence the tuneful cries
    Of clustering pea-fowls shrill and frequent rise,
    Teach tender feelings to each human breast,
    And please alike the happy or distressed."

The peacock flies to the highest station he can reach, to enjoy himself;
and rises to the topmost boughs of trees, though the female makes her
nest on the ground.

F.R.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


A WARNING TO FRUIT EATERS.

(_For the Mirror_.)


The mischiefs arising from the bad custom of many people swallowing the
stones of plums and other fruit are very great. In the _Philosophical
Transactions_, No. 282, there is an account of a woman who suffered
violent pains in her bowels for thirty years, returning once in a month,
or less, owing to a plum-stone which had lodged; which, after various
operations, was extracted. There is likewise an account of a man, who
dying of an incurable colic, which had tormented him many years, and
baffled the effects of medicine, was opened after his death, and in his
bowels was found the cause of his distemper, which was a ball, composed
of tough and hard matter, resembling a stone, being six inches in
circumference, when measured, and weighing an ounce and a half; in the
centre of this there was found the stone of a common plum. These
instances sufficiently prove the folly of that common opinion, that the
stones of fruits are wholesome. Cherry-stones, swallowed in great
quantities, have occasioned the death of many people; and there have
been instances even of the seeds of strawberries, and kernels of nuts,
collected into a lump in the bowels, and causing violent disorders,
which could never be cured till they were carried off.

P.T.W.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NIGHTINGALE,

BY THE AUTHOR OF "AHAB."

(_For the Mirror_.)


    In the low dingle sings the nightingale.
      And echo answers; all beside is still.
    The breeze is gone to fill some distant sail,
      And on the sand to sleep has sunk the rill.
    The blackbird and the thrush have sought the vale.
      And the lark soars no more above the hill,
    For the broad sun is up all hotly pale,
      And in my reins I feel his parching thrill.

    Hark! how each note, so beautifully clear,
      So soft, so sweetly mellow, rings around.
    Then faintly dies away upon the ear,
      That fondly vibrates to the fading sound.
    Poor bird, thou sing'st, the thorn within thy heart,
      And I from sorrows, that will not depart.

S.P.J.

       *       *       *       *       *



SPIRIT OF THE PUBLIC JOURNALS

       *       *       *       *       *


A NIGHT ATTACK.


Charlton and I were in the act of smoking our cigars, the men having
laid themselves down about the blaze, when word was passed from sentry
to sentry, and intelligence communicated to us, that all was not right
towards the river. We started instantly to our feet. The fire was
hastily smothered up, and the men snatching their arms, stood in line,
ready to act as circumstances might require. So dense, however, was the
darkness, and so dazzling the effect of the glare from the bivouac, that
it was not possible, standing where we stood, to form any reasonable
guess, as to the cause of this alarm. That an alarm had been excited,
was indeed perceptible enough. Instead of the deep silence which five
minutes ago had prevailed in the bivouac, a strange hubbub of shouts,
and questions, and as many cries, rose up the night air; nor did many
minutes elapse, ere first one musket, then three or four, then a whole
platoon, were discharged. The reader will _easily_ believe that the
latter circumstance startled us prodigiously, ignorant as we were of the
cause which produced it; but it required no very painful exertion of
patience to set us right on this head; flash, flash, flash, came from
the river; the roar of cannon followed, and the light of her own
broadside displayed to us an enemy's vessel at anchor near the opposite
bank, and pouring a perfect shower of grape and round shot into
the camp.

For one instant, and only for an instant, a scene of alarm and
consternation overcame us; and we almost instinctively addressed to each
other the question, "What can all this mean?" But the meaning was too
palpable not to be understood at once. "The thing cannot end here," said
we--"a night attack is commencing;" and we made no delay in preparing to
meet it. Whilst Charlton remained with the picquet, in readiness to act
as the events might demand, I came forward to the sentries, for the
purpose of cautioning them against paying attention to what might pass
in their rear, and keeping them steadily engaged in watching their
front. The men were fully alive to the peril of their situation. They
strained with their hearing and eyesight to the utmost limits; but
neither sound nor sight of an advancing column could be perceived. At
last, however, an alarm was given. One of the rifles challenged--it was
the sentinel on the high road; the sentinel who communicated with him
challenged also; and the cry was taken up from man to man, till our own
most remote sentry caught it. I flew to his station; and sure enough the
tramp of many feet was most distinctly audible. Having taken the
precaution to carry an orderly forward with me, I caused him to hurry
back to Charlton with intelligence of what was coming, and my earnest
recommendation that he would lose no time in occupying the ditch. I had
hardly done so, when the noise of a column deploying was distinctly
heard. The tramp of horses, too, came mingled with the tread of men; in
a word, it was quite evident that a large force, both of infantry and
cavalry, was before us.

There was a pause at this period of several moments, as if the enemy's
line, having effected its formation, had halted till some other
arrangement should be completed; but it was quickly broke. On they came,
as far as we could judge from the sound, in steady array, till at length
their line could be indistinctly seen rising through the gloom. The
sentinels with one consent gave their fire. They gave it regularly and
effectively, beginning with the rifles on their left, and going off
towards the 85th on their right, and then, in obedience to their orders,
fell back. But they retired not unmolested. This straggling discharge on
our part seemed to be the signal to the Americans to begin the battle,
and they poured in such a volley, as must have proved, had any
determinate object been opposed to it, absolutely murderous. But our
scattered videttes almost wholly escaped it; whilst over the main body
of the picquet, sheltered as it was by the ditch, and considerably
removed from its line, it passed entirely harmless.

Having fired this volley, the enemy loaded again, and advanced. We saw
them coming, and having waited till we judged that they were within
excellent range, we opened our fire. It was returned in tenfold force,
and now went on, for a full half hour, as heavy and close a discharge of
musketry as troops have perhaps ever faced. Confident in their numbers,
and led on, as it would appear, by brave officers, the Americans dashed
forward till scarcely ten yards divided us; but our position was an
admirable one, our men were steady and cool, and they penetrated no
farther. On the contrary, we drove them back, more than once, with a
loss which their own inordinate multitude tended only to render the
more severe.

The action might have continued in this state about two hours, when, to
our horror and dismay, the approaching fire upon our right flank and
rear gave testimony that the picquet of the 85th, which had been in
communication with us, was forced. Unwilling to abandon our ground,
which we had hitherto held with such success, we clung for awhile to the
idea that the reverse in that quarter might be only temporary, and that
the arrival of fresh troops might yet enable us to continue the battle
in a position so eminently favourable to us. But we were speedily taught
that our hopes were without foundation. The American war-cry was behind
us. We rose from our lairs, and endeavoured, as we best could, to retire
upon the right, but the effort was fruitless. There too the enemy had
established themselves, and we were surrounded. "Let us cut our way
through," cried we to the men. The brave fellows answered only with a
shout; and collecting into a small compact line, prepared to use their
bayonets. In a moment we had penetrated the centre of an American
division; but the numbers opposed to us were overwhelming; our close
order was lost; and the contest became that of man to man. I have no
language adequate to describe what followed. For myself, I did what I
could, cutting and thrusting at the multitudes about me, till at last I
found myself fairly hemmed in by a crowd, and my sword-arm mastered. One
American had grasped me round the waist, another, seizing me by the
wrist, attempted to disarm me, whilst a third was prevented from
plunging his bayonet into my body, only from the fear of stabbing one or
other of his countrymen. I struggled hard, but they fairly bore me to
the ground. The reader will well believe, that at this juncture I
expected nothing else than instant death; but at the moment when I fell,
a blow upon the head with the butt-end of a musket dashed out the brains
of the man who kept his hold upon my sword-arm, and it was freed. I saw
a bayonet pointed to my breast, and I intuitively made a thrust at the
man who wielded it. The thrust took effect, and he dropped dead beside
me. Delivered now from two of my enemies, I recovered my feet, and found
that the hand which dealt the blow to which my preservation was owing,
was that of Charlton. There were about ten men about him. The enemy in
our front were broken, and we dashed through. But we were again hemmed
in, and again it was fought hand to hand, with that degree of
determination, which the assurance that life and death were on the
issue, could alone produce. There cannot be a doubt that we should have
fallen to a man, had not the arrival of fresh troops at this critical
juncture turned the tide of affairs. As it was, little more than a third
part of our picquet survived, the remainder being either killed or
taken; and both Charlton and myself, though not dangerously, were
wounded. Charlton had received a heavy blow upon the shoulder, which
almost disabled him; whilst my neck bled freely from a thrust, which the
intervention of a stout leathern stock alone hindered from being fatal.
But the reinforcement gave us all, in spite of wounds and weariness,
fresh courage, and we renewed the battle with alacrity.

In the course of the struggle in which we had been engaged, we had been
borne considerably out of the line of our first position, and now found
that the main-road and the picquet of the rifles, were close in our
rear. We were still giving way--for the troops opposed to us could not
amount to less than fifteen hundred men, whilst the whole force on our
part came not up to one hundred--when Captain Harris, major of brigade
to Colonel Thornton, came up with an additional company to our support.
Making way for them to fall in between us and the rifles, we took ground
once more to the right, and driving back a body of the enemy, which
occupied it, soon recovered the position from which we had been
expelled. But we did so with the loss of many brave men, and, among
others, of Captain Harris. He was shot in the lower part of the belly at
the same instant that a musket-ball struck the hilt of his sword, and
forced it into his side. Once more established in our ditch, we paused,
and from that moment till the battle ceased to rage we never changed
our attitude.

It might be about one o'clock in the morning,--the American force in our
front having fallen back, and we having been left, for a full half hour
to breathe, when suddenly the head of a small column showed itself in
full advance towards us. We were at this time amply supported by other
troops, as well in communication as in reserve; and willing to
annihilate the corps now approaching, we forbade the men to fire till it
should be mingled with us. We did even more than this. Opening a passage
for them through our centre, we permitted some hundred and twenty men to
march across our ditch, and then wheeling up, with a loud shout, we
completely enclosed them. Never have I witnessed a panic more perfect or
more sudden than that which seized them. They no sooner beheld the snare
into which they had fallen, than with one voice they cried aloud for
quarter; and they were to a man made prisoners on the spot. The reader
will smile when he is informed that the little corps thus captured
consisted entirely of members of the legal profession. The barristers,
attorneys, and notaries of New Orleans having formed themselves into a
volunteer corps, accompanied General Jackson in his operations this
night; and they were all, without a solitary exception, made prisoners.
It is probably needless to add, that the circumstance was productive of
no trifling degree of mirth amongst us; and to do them justice, the poor
lawyers, as soon as they recovered from their first alarm, joined
heartily in our laughter.

This was the last operation in which we were engaged to-night. The
enemy, repulsed on all sides, retreated with the utmost disorder, and
the whole of the advance, collecting at the sound of the bugle, drew up,
for the first time since the commencement of the affair, in a continuous
line. We took our ground in front of the bivouac, having our right
supported by the river, and our left covered by the chateau and village
of huts. Among these latter the cannon were planted; whilst the other
divisions, as they came rapidly up, took post beyond them. In this
position we remained, eagerly desiring a renewal of the attack, till
dawn began to appear, when, to avoid the fire of the vessel, the advance
once more took shelter behind the bank. The first brigade, on the
contrary, and such portion of the second as had arrived, encamped upon
the plain, so as to rest their right upon the wood; and a chain of
picquets being planted along the entire pathway, the day was passed in a
state of inaction.

I hardly recollect to have spent fourteen or fifteen hours with less
comfort to myself than these. In the hurry and bustle of last night's
engagement, my servant, to whose care I had intrusted my cloak and
haversack, disappeared; he returned not during the whole morning; and as
no provisions were issued out to us, nor any opportunity given to light
fires, I was compelled to endure, all that time, the extremes of hunger,
weariness, and cold. As ill luck would have it, too, the day chanced to
be remarkably severe. There was no rain, it is true, but the sky was
covered with gray clouds; the sun never once pierced them, and a frost,
or rather a vile blight, hung upon the atmosphere from morning till
night. Nor were the objects which occupied our senses of sight and
hearing quite such as we should have desired to occupy them. In other
parts of the field, the troops, not shut up as we were by the enemy's
guns, employed themselves in burying the dead, and otherwise effacing
the traces of warfare. The site of our encampment continued to be
strewed with carcases to the last; and so watchful were the crew of the
schooner, that every effort to convey them out of sight brought a heavy
fire upon the party engaged in it. I must say, that the enemy's
behaviour on the present occasion was not such as did them honour. The
house which General Kean had originally occupied as head-quarters, being
converted into an hospital, was filled at this time with wounded, both
from the British and American armies. To mark its uses, a yellow flag,
the usual signal in such cases, was hoisted on the roof--yet did the
Americans continue to fire at it, as often as a group of six or eight
persons happened to show themselves at the door. Nay, so utterly
regardless were they of the dictates of humanity, that even the parties
who were in the act of conveying the wounded from place to place,
escaped not without molestation. More than one such party was dispersed
by grape-shot, and more than one poor maimed soldier was in consequence
hurled out of the blanket in which he was borne.

The reader will not doubt me when I say, that seldom has the departure
of day-light been more anxiously looked for by me, than we looked for it
now. It is true, that the arrival of a little rum towards evening served
in some slight degree to elevate our spirits; but we could not help
feeling, not vexation only, but positive indignation, at the state of
miserable inaction to which we were condemned.

There was not a man amongst us who would have hesitated one moment, had
the choice been submitted to him, whether he would advance or lie still.
True, we might have suffered a little, because the guns of the schooner
entirely commanded us; and in rushing out from our place of concealment
some casualties would have occurred; but so irksome was our situation,
that we would have readily run all risks to change it. It suited not the
plans of our general, however, to indulge these wishes. To the bank we
were enjoined to cling; and we did cling to it, from the coming in of
the first gray twilight of the morning, till the last twilight of
evening had departed.

As soon as it was well dark, the corps to which Charlton and myself were
attached received orders to file off to the right. We obeyed, and
passing along the front of the hospital, we skirted to the rear of the
village, and established ourselves in the field beyond. It was a
positive blessing this restoration to something like personal freedom.
The men set busily to work, lighting fires and cooking provisions;--the
officers strolled about, with no other apparent design than to give
employment to their limbs, which had become stiff with so protracted a
state of inaction. For ourselves we visited the wounded, said a few kind
words to such as we recognised, and pitied, as they deserved to be
pitied, the rest. Then retiring to our fire, we addressed ourselves with
hearty good will to a frugal supper, and gladly composed ourselves to
sleep.--_A Subaltern in America.--Blackwood's Magazine._

       *       *       *       *       *


SONNET--NOCHE SERENA.


    How tranquil is the night! The torrent's roar
    Dies off far distant; through the lattice streams
    The pure, white, silvery moonshine, mantling o'er
    The couch and curtains with its fairy gleams.
    Sweet is the prospect; sweeter are the dreams
    From which my loathful eyelid now unclosed:--
    Methought beside a forest we reposed,
    Marking the summer sun's far western beams,
    A dear-loved friend and I. The nightingale
    To silence and to us her pensive tale
    Sang forth; the very tone of vanish'd years
    Came o'er me, feelings warm, and visions bright;
    Alas! how quick such vision disappears,
    To leave the spectral moon and silent night!

_Delta of Blackwood's Magazine._

       *       *       *       *       *



ARTS AND SCIENCES.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE BEECH TREE.--A NONCONDUCTOR OF LIGHTNING.


Dr. Beeton, in a letter to Dr. Mitchill of New York, dated 19th of July,
1824, states, that the beech tree (that is, the broad leaved or American
variety of _Fagus sylvatiea_,) is never known to be assailed by
atmospheric electricity. So notorious, he says, is this fact, that in
Tenessee, it is considered almost an impossibility to be struck by
lightning, if protection be sought under the branches of a beech tree.
Whenever the sky puts on a threatening aspect, and the thunder begins to
roll, the Indians leave their pursuit, and betake themselves to the
shelter of the nearest beech tree, till the storm pass over; observation
having taught these sagacious children of nature, that, while other
trees are often shivered to splinters, the electric fluid is not
attracted by the beech. Should farther observation establish the fact of
the non-conducting quality of the American beech, great advantage may
evidently be derived from planting hedge rows of such trees around the
extensive barn yards in which cattle are kept, and also in disposing
groups and single trees in ornamental plantations in the neighbourhood
of the dwelling houses of the owners.--_New Monthly Magazine._


ANTIQUITIES.


A valuable discovery was made the other day in Westminster Abbey. It had
become necessary to make repairs near the tomb of Edward the Confessor,
when, by removing a portion of the pavement, an exquisitely beautiful
piece of carved work, which had originally formed part of the shrine of
Edward's tomb, was discovered. This fine relic, the work of the eleventh
or twelfth century, appears to have been studded with precious stones;
and the presumption is, that during the late civil wars it was taken
down for the purpose of plunder, and after the gems were taken out,
buried under the ground (very near the surface of the earth) to avoid
detection.--_Ibid._

       *       *       *       *       *



ARCHERY

[Illustration]


Previous to introducing the communication of a much respected
correspondent, who has well described, by drawing and observation, a
Royal Archer of Scotland, we shall offer a few general remarks on the
subject of the above engraving, which relates to an amusement which we
are happy to find is patronized in many counties in England by
respectable classes of society at this day. No instrument of warfare is
more ancient than that of the bow and arrow, and the skill of the
English bowmen is celebrated. It seems, that in ancient times the
English had the advantage over enemies chiefly by their archers and
light-armed troops.

The _archers_ were armed with a long-bow, a sheaf of arrows, a sword,
and a small shield.

The _cross-bowmen_, as their name implies, were armed with the
cross-bow, and arrows called _quarrels_.

Even after the invention of guns, the English archers are spoken of as
excelling those of all other nations; and an ancient writer affirms that
an English arrow, with a little wax upon its point, would pass through
any ordinary corselet or cuirass. It is uncertain how far the archers
with the long-bow could send an arrow; but the cross-bowmen could shoot
their quarrels to the distance of forty rods, or the eighth part of a
mile. For a more general and extended notice of the history of archery,
however, we refer our readers to a recent volume,[2] and here we have
the correspondence alluded to a few lines above.

    [2] MIRROR, Vol. viii., p. 324.


A ROYAL ARCHER OF SCOTLAND.

(_For the Mirror._)

    "Good-morrowe, good fellow,--
    Methinks, by this bowe thou beares in thy hand
    A good archere thou shouldst bee."
_Old Ballad_.

[Illustration]


I feel happy that it is in my power to present a drawing, made expressly
for the purpose, of the picturesque costume worn by the Royal Company of
Archers, or King's Body Guard of Scotland. This is described in Stark's
"Picture of Edinburgh" thus:--"Their uniform is 42nd tartan, with green
velvet collar and cuffs, and a Highland bonnet, with feathers; on the
front of the bonnet is the cross of St. Andrew, and a gold arrow on the
collar of the jacket." There is a something in the very idea of an
archer, and in the name of _Robin Hood_, particularly charming to most
bosoms, coming as they do to us fraught with all delicious associations;
the wild, free forest life, the sweet pastime, the adventures of bold
outlaws amid the heaven of sylvan scenery, and the national renown of
British bowmen which mingles with the records of our chivalry in history
and romance; while the revival of _archery_ in England of late years, as
an elegant amusement, sufficiently proves that the high feeling which
seems mysteriously to blend a present age with one long since gone by,
is not totally extinct. Shall I venture to assert, that for this we are
indebted to the charmed light cast around a noble and ancient pastime by
the antiquary, poet, and romance-writer of modern times? But to return,
the Scottish archers were first formed into a company and obtained a
charter, granting them great privileges, under the reign of queen Anne,
for which they were to pay to the crown, annually, a pair of barbed
arrows. One of these allowances was, that they might _meet and go forth
under their officer's conduct, in military form, in manner of
weapon-showing, as often as they should think convenient_. "But they
have made no public parade since 1743,"[3] owing, probably, to the state
of parties in Edinburgh, for their attachment to the Stuart family was
well understood, and falling under the suspicion of the British
government after the rebellion of 1745, they were watched, "and spies
appointed to frequent their company." The company possess a house built
by themselves, termed Archers' Hall. All their business is transacted by
a president and six counsellors, who are nominated by the members at
large, and have authority to admit or reject candidates _ad libitum_.
The number of this association is now very great, having been of late
years much increased; they have standards, with appropriate emblems and
mottoes, and shoot for several prizes annually; amongst these are a
silver bowl and arrows, which, by a singular regulation, "are retained
by the successful candidate only one year, when he appends a medal to
them; and as these prizes are of more than a hundred years standing, the
number of medals now attached to them are very curious."

    [3] Their part in the procession formed to welcome our monarch
    to his Scottish metropolis, should be excepted.

To this notice may I be permitted to subjoin a few stanzas? Old Izaak
Walton hath put songs and sylvan poesy in plenty into the mouths of his
anglers and rural _dramatis personae_, and shall _I_ be blamed for
following, in all humility, his illustrious example? Perchance--but
hold! it is one of the fairest of summer mornings; the sun sheds a pure,
a silvery light on the young, fresh, new-waked foliage and herbage; a
faint mist veils the blue distance of the landscape; but the pearly
shroud conceals not yonder troop of young blithe men, who, arranged in
green, after the olden fashion, each bearing the implements of archery,
and tripping lightly over the heath, are carolling in the joy of their
free spirits, while the fresh breeze brings to my ear most distinctly
the words of


THE ARCHER'S SONG.


    Away!--away!--yon golden sun
    Hath chas'd nights' shadows damp and dun;
    Forth from his turfy couch, the lark
    Hath sprung to meet glad day: and hark!
    A mingling and delicious song
    Breathes from the blithe-voiced plumy throng;
    While, to the green-wood hasten _we_
    Whose craft is, gentle archery!

    Now swift we bound o'er dewy grass!
    Rousing the red fox as we pass,
    And startling linnet, merle, and thrush,
    As recklessly the boughs we brush.
    The _hunter's_ horn sings thro' the brakes.
    And its soft lay apt echo takes;
    But soon her sweet enamoured tone
    Shall tell what song is all _our_ own!

    On!--on!--glad brothers of the bow!
    The dun deer's couching place ye know,
    And gallant bucks this day shall rue
    Our feather'd shafts,--so swift,--so true;
    Yet, sorer than the sylvan train,
    Our foes, upon the battle-plain,
    Will mourn at the unerring hands
    Of Albion's _matchless_ archer bands!

    Now hie we on, to silent shades,
    To glist'ning streams, and sunlit glades,
    Where all that woodland life can give,
    Renders it bliss indeed, to _live_.
    Come, ye who love the shadowy wood,
    Whate'er your days, whate'er your mood.
    And join _us_, freakish knights that be
    Of grey-goose wing, and good yew-tree!

    Say--are ye _mirthful_?--then we'll sing
    Of wayward feasts and frolicking;--
    Tell jests and gibes,--nor lack we store
    Of knightly tales, and monkish lore;
    High freaks of dames and cavaliers,
    Of warlocks, spectres, elfs, and seers,
    Till with glad heart, and blithesome brow,
    Ye bless your brothers of the bow!

    Is _sadness_ courted?--ye shall lie
    When summer's sultry noons are high,
    By darkling forest's shadow'd stream
    To muse;--or, sweeter still, to dream
    Day-dreams of love; while round ye rise
    Distant, delicious harmonies;
    Until ye languishing declare
    An archer's life, indeed is fair!

M. L. B.

       *       *       *       *       *



THE NOVELIST

NO. CV.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GHIBELLINES.

_A Fragment of a Tuscan Tale_.

BY MISS EMMA ROBERTS.

    "His name's Gonzago.--The story is extant, and written in very
    choice Italian."


Ten thousand lights burned throughout the Alberoni palace, and all the
nobility of Florence flocked to the bridal of its wealthy lord. It was a
fair sight to see the stately mirrors which spread their shining
surfaces between pillars of polished marble reflecting the gay
assemblage, that, radiant with jewels, promenaded the saloon, or
wreathed the dance to the witching music of the most skilful minstrels
in all Tuscany. Every lattice was open, and the eye, far as it could
reach, wandered through illuminated gardens, tenanted by gay groups,
where the flush of the roses, the silver stars of the jasmine, the
crimson, purple, orange, and blue of the variegated parterre were
revealed as if the brightest blaze of day flashed upon their silken
leaves. Amid all this pomp of beauty and splendour the bride moved
along, surpassing all that was fair and resplendent around her by the
exceeding loveliness of a face and form to which every eye and every
heart paid involuntary homage. At her side appeared the exulting
bridegroom, to whom, however, more it should seem through diffidence
than aversion, her eyes were never raised; for though Count Alberoni had
advanced beyond the middle age of life, yet he still retained the
majestic port and commanding lineaments for which he had been
distinguished in early youth; his riches rendered him all potent in
Florence, and none dared dispute with him the possession of its fairest
flower. Intoxicated with the pleasures offered at the banquet and the
ball, whatever of envy or of jealousy might have been hidden in the
bosoms of the guests while contemplating the treasure which the
triumphant Alberoni had snatched from contending suitors, it was
concealed, and the most cheerful hilarity prevailed. Yet, amid the
general expression of happiness, there were two persons who, attracting
notice by the meanness of their attire, and the melancholy gloom upon
their countenances, seemed to be out of place in so stately and so
joyous an assembly. They were brother and sister, the descendants of
Ghibellines who had died in exile, and distant relations of the Count,
who though not choosing to regard them as his heirs, had, when the
abolition of a severe law enabled the proscribed faction to return to
Florence, accorded them shelter and protection. Meanly clad in vestments
of coarse serge, there were yet no cavaliers who fluttered in silk and
velvet who could compare in personal beauty with Francesco Gonzago; and
the bride alone, of all the beauties who shone in gold and silver,
appeared superior in feminine charms to the lovely Beatrice,
notwithstanding that her cumbrous robe of grey stuff obscured the
delicate proportions of her sylph-like form. Buoyant in spirit, and
animated by the scene before her, occasionally a gleam of sunshine would
irradiate her brow as she gazed upon the sparkling throng who formed the
brilliant pageant which so much delighted her; but as she turned to
express her feelings to her brother, his pale pensive features and the
recollection of the intense anguish which wrung his heart, subdued her
gaiety, the smile passed away from her lip, the rose deserted her cheek,
and she stood by his side sad and sorrowful as some monumental statue.
Many persons grieved at the depressed fortunes of the once powerful
Gonzagos, but there were others who sneered at their present
degradation, enjoying the cruel mockery with which Alberoni had forced
the man who had cherished hopes of succeeding as heir-at-law to his
immense estates, to witness the downfall of those flattering
expectations. Few and slight were the salutations which passed between
the dejected pair and the more illustrious guests; but as the bride made
the circuit of the apartments, she paused when approaching her husband's
neglected relatives, and raising eyes swimming with drops of sympathy,
greeted them with unaffected tenderness. Francesco was unprepared for
the gentle kindness of her address; his stern heart melted, his proud
glance suddenly changed to one of gracious courtesy; he gazed upon her
as upon some angelic being sent down from heaven to soothe and gladden
his perturbed soul; and henceforward he saw nothing in the glare, and
the crowd, and the splendour around him, save the sweet face and the
delicate form of the Countess Alberoni; his charmed eyes followed her
from place to place, and so entirely was he engrossed by one object,
that he did not perceive that the attention of Beatrice was almost
wholly occupied by a young and sprightly cavalier, who pursued her like
a shadow, pouring tender tales in a not unwilling ear. Group by group
the guests retired from the festive scene, and the brother and sister,
scarcely able to define the new feelings which sprung up in the heart of
each, quitted the magnificent palace to seek their forlorn abode. A
pavilion, nearly in ruins, was the sole shelter which the proud lord of
Alberoni afforded to the only surviving branches of his family, when
returning to their native city they found their patrimonial estates
confiscated, and themselves dependent upon the niggard bounty of a cold
and selfish relative. Slowly recovering from a severe wound which he had
received in the wars of Lombardy, and disgusted with the ingratitude of
the prince he served, the ill-starred Francesco was at first rejoiced to
obtain any refuge from the storms of a tempestuous world; and the
unceasing efforts of his young and affectionate sister to reconcile him
to a bitter lot were not wholly unavailing. Summer had spread her
richest treasures upon the lap of Nature; and the fairy hands of
Beatrice transformed the bare walls of the dilapidated edifice which
they inhabited into bowers of luxuriant foliage; the most delicious
fruit also, the spontaneous product of the garden, cooled at some
crystal fount and heaped with flowers, tempted her brother's languid
appetite; and, waking the soft notes of her lute, she soothed his
desponding spirit with music's gentlest sound. Fondly trusting that
Francesco might be won to prize the simple enjoyments of which fortune
could not despoil him, and to find his dearest happiness in an approving
conscience, the light hearted girl indulged in delusive hopes of future
felicity. But these expectations were soon damped; as Francesco's health
returned he became restless and melancholy; he saw no prospect of
arriving at distinction by his talents, or by his sword; peace reigned
throughout the Tuscan states, and the jealousy of the government of all
who bore the mark of Ghibelline extraction, forbade the chance of
successful exertion and honourable reward; his days were spent in moody
abstraction, his nights in feverish dreams; his misfortunes, his
accomplishments and his virtues failed to excite affection in the breast
of his kinsman, who, jealous of the youth and personal attractions of
the man apparently destined to be his heir, grew uneasy at the thought
of benefitting a person he had learned to hate; and suddenly resolving
to cut off at once the presumptuous expectations which the luckless
exile might have cherished, exerted the influence procured by his wealth
to form an alliance with the most peerless beauty which the city
boasted. A new source of anguish added to the misery already sustained
by the wretched Gonzago; his arm was paralyzed by the utter hopelessness
of any attempt to emerge from the obscurity to which fate had condemned
him; he brooded over the dismal futurity which opened before him; and,
as a solace to these gloomy meditations, suffered his imagination to
dwell upon the charms and graces of the lovely Giacinta, his kinsman's
gentle bride. He saw her sometimes flitting through the myrtle groves
which skirted the neighbouring palace; and when night favoured his
concealment, he would approach the marble porticos to catch the sound of
her voice as, accompanied by a lute, she wasted its melody upon the
silent stars. Beatrice, in the mean time, experienced only in the pale
brow and haggard form of her brother an alloy to her happiness.
Alessandro, the young heir of the Orsini family, had abandoned the gay
revels of Florence to share the solitude of the despised Ghibellines;
and although there seemed to be little chance of ultimate triumph over
the obstacles which opposed themselves to an alliance between the
prosperous scion of a noble house and the unportioned orphan of a
banished man, yet hope pre-ponderated over fear, and, blessed by her
enchanting smiles, the lover indulged in delightful anticipations.

...

Again was the Alberoni palace illumined by innumerable tapers; again
were the glittering saloons filled with all the noble population of
Florence. A second nuptial feast, more splendid and joyous than the
first, was celebrated; again Giacinta, lovelier than ever, shone as the
bride, and by her side a cavalier appeared, whose summer of life was
better adapted to match with her tender years than the mature age of her
late husband had been.

The Count Alberoni Gonzago was dead; and Francesco succeeding to his
wealth, had obtained the hand of his widow. Beatrice, also a bride,
followed in the train of the Countess, but followed more like a mourner
at some funeral solemnity than as the newly wedded consort of the
husband of her choice. Francesco all smiles and triumph, as he stood
with the fairest hand in Florence hanging on his arm, proudly greeting
the guests who crowded to pay him homage, turned frequently, and cast
looks of piercing examination and reproach upon his pale and trembling
sister, and, as if fascinated by his glance, she would rally her,
failing spirits and smile languidly upon the bridegroom, who bent over
her enamoured; and then, as if beguiled from some painful contemplation
by the sweet accents of the man she loved, she became calm, and her
quivering features resumed their wonted placidity. But these moments of
tranquillity were of short duration; she started at every shadow; the
flash of one of the jewels which broidered her satin robe would cause a
fit of trembling; and at length, when seated at the banquet opposite her
brother and his bride, a richly clad domestic offered wine in a golden
goblet; for a moment she held it to her lips, and then dashed it away,
exclaiming--"It is poison! Hide me,--save me. I see it every where; in
those green leaves from whence it was distilled.--Oh! Francesco,
Francesco, let us be poor and happy!" The guests shrunk aghast from the
speaker, who, falling from her seat, expired in convulsions.

The power conferred by Gonzago's immense riches silenced the whispered
murmurs of the assembly. No man rose to higher eminence in the state
than the idolized husband of the beautiful Giacinta; but a dark cloud
hung upon his house, his children were all cut off in their infancy,
and, after a few brief years of outward felicity, struck from his horse
by the fragment of a building which fell upon him as he rode in pomp
through the city, he received a mortal wound, surviving the accident
only long enough to unburthen his soul to his confessor.

His dying words were addressed to Alessandro, from whom since the hour
of his nuptials he had been estranged; pressing his hand, he
exclaimed--"She was innocent! she heard not of the murder until it had
been accomplished."--_London Weekly Review_.

       *       *       *       *       *



THE SELECTOR; AND LITERARY NOTICES OF NEW WORKS.

       *       *       *       *       *


RAFTS AND RHINE SCENERY.


Between Andernach and Bonn I saw two or three of those enormous rafts
which are formed of the accumulated produce of the Swiss and German
forests. One was anchored in the middle of the river, and looked like a
floating island. These _Krakens_ of the Rhine are composed of oak and
fir floated in smaller rafts down the tributary streams, and, their size
constantly increasing till they arrive hereabouts, they make platforms
of from four hundred to seven hundred feet long, and one hundred and
forty feet in breadth. When in motion, a dozen boats and more precede
them, carrying anchors and cables to guide and arrest their course. The
navigation of a raft down the Rhine to Dort, in Holland, which is the
place of their destination,[4] is a work of great difficulty. The skill
of the German and Dutch pilots who navigate them, in spite of the abrupt
turnings, the eddies, the currents, rocks and shoals that oppose their
progress, must indeed be of a very peculiar kind, and can be possessed
but by few. It requires besides a vast deal of manual labour. The whole
complement of rowers and workmen, together with their wives and
children, on board one of the _first-rates_, amounts to the astonishing
number of nine hundred or a thousand; a little village, containing from
forty to sixty wooden houses, is erected upon each, which also is
furnished with stalls for cattle, a magazine for provisions, &c. The
dwelling appropriated to the use of the master of the raft and the
principal super-cargoes was conspicuous for its size and commodiousness.
It is curious to observe these rafts, on their passage, with their
companies of rowers stationed at each end, making the shores ring again
to the sound of their immense oars.

    [4] About twelve of these rafts annually arrive at Dort, in
    July or August; when the German timber merchants, having
    converted their floats into good Dutch ducats, return to their
    own country. When the water is low, those machines are
    sometimes months upon the journey.--_Campbell's Guide_.

The succession of grand natural pictures, which I had been gazing upon
since my departure from Mentz and the district of the Rheingau, are
undoubtedly similar, but not the same; there is alternately the long
noble reach, the sudden bend, the lake-like expanse, the shores on both
sides lined with towns whose antique fortifications rise in distant
view, and villages whose tapering spires of blue slate peer above the
embosoming foliage; the mountains clothed with vines and forests, their
sides bristled and their summits crowned with the relics of feudal
residences,[5] or of cloistered fanes: but the varieties in the shape
and character of all these are inexhaustible; it is this circumstance
that enhances the pleasure of contemplating, scenery, in which there is,
as Lord Byron says,

    "A blending of all beauties, streams and dells,
    Fruit, foliage, crag, wood, corn-field, mountain, vine,
    And chiefless castles breathing stern farewells,
    From gray but leafy walls where ruin greenly dwells."

    [5] There are the ruins of fourteen castles on the left bank,
    and of fifteen on the right bank of the Rhine, from Mentz to
    Bonn, a distance of thirty-six leagues.

The oppositions of light and shade; the rich culture of the hills
contrasted with the rugged rocks that often rise from out of the midst
of fertility; the bright verdure of the islands which the Rhine is
continually forming; the purple hues and misty azure of the distant
mountains--these and a thousand other indescribable charms constitute
sources of visual delight which can be imparted only by a view of the
objects themselves. And is excitement awakened in contemplating the
borders of this graceful and magnificent river? Yes. When we revert to
the awful convulsions of the physical world, and the important
revolutions of human society, of which the regions it flows through have
been successively the theatre--when we meditate on the vast changes, the
fearful struggles, the tragic incidents and mournful catastrophes, which
they have witnessed from the earliest ages to the very times in which we
have ourselves lived and marked the issue of events--"the battles,
sieges, fortunes" that have passed before its green tumultuous current,
or within ken of its mountain watch-towers--the shouts of nations that
have resounded, and the fates of empires that have been decided, on its
shores--when we think of the slaughtered myriads whose bones have
bleached on the neighbouring plains, filled up the trenches of its
rock-built strong-holds, or found their place of sepulture beneath its
wave--when, at each survey we take of the wide and diversified scene,
the forms of centuries seem to be embodied with the objects around us,
and the record of the past becomes vividly associated with the
impression of present realities--it is then that we are irresistibly led
to compare the greatness of nature with the littleness of man; it is
then that we are forcibly struck with the power and goodness of the
Author of both; and that the deepest humility unites itself in a
grateful mind, with the highest admiration, at the sight of "these His
lowest works."

But do you pretend, it may be asked, in the course of a three days'
journey, however lengthened by celerity of conveyance, or favoured by
advantages of season or weather--do you pretend to have experienced that
very eminent degree of gratification which the country is capable of
communicating? Certainly not. I speak of these scenes but as of things,
which before my own hasty and unsatisfied glances came like shadows--so
departed. Instead of two or three days, a whole month should be spent
between Mentz, Coblentz, and Bonn, in order fully to know and thoroughly
to enjoy the beauties and grandeurs with which that space
abounds.--_Stevenson's Tour in France, &c._

       *       *       *       *       *


THE BARBER.


    Nick Razorblade a barber was,
      A _strapping_ lad was he;
    And he could shave with such a grace,
      It was a joy to see!

    And tho' employ'd within his house,
      He kept like rat in hole;
    All those that pass'd the barber's door,
      Could always see his _pole_!

    His dress was rather plain than rich,
      Nor fitted over well;
    Yet, tho' no _macaroni_, Nick,
      He often _cut a swell_!

    And Nick was brave, and he could fight,
      As many times he proved;
    A lamb became a lion fierce,
      Whenever he was moved!

    Like many of his betters, who
      To field with pistols rush,
    When Nicky _lather'd_ any one,
      He was obliged to _brush_!

    Some say Nick was a brainless _block_,
      While those who've seen him waving
    His bright sharp razor, o'er scap'd chins,
      Declare he was a _shaving_!

    His next door neighbour, Nelly Jones,
      A maid of thirty-eight,
    'Twas said regarded Nick with smiles,
      But folks will always prate.

    'Tis known in summer time that she,
      (A maid and only daughter)
    To show her love for Razorblade,
      Kept Nicky in _hot water_!

    For politics Nick always said,
      He never cared a fig;
    Quoth he:--"If I a Tory were,
      I likewise _wear a wig_!"

    No poacher he, yet _hairs_ he _wired_,
      With skill that made maids prouder;
    And though he never used a gun,
      He knew the use of _powder_!

    He never took offence at words,
      However broad or blunt;
    But when maids brought a _front_ to dress,
      Of course he took a _front_!

    Beneath his razor folks have slept,
      So easy were they mown;
    Yet (oh! most passing strange it was!)
      His _razor_ was his _own_!

    Nick doubtless had a tender heart,
      But not for Nelly Jones;
    He made Miss Popps "bone of his bone,"
      But never made old bones!

    He died and left an only son,
      A barber too by trade;
    But when they ope'd his will, they found
      A cruel will he'd made.

    And doubtless he was raving mad,
      (To slander I'm unwilling)
    For tho' a _barber_, Nicky cut
      His _heir_ off with _a shilling!_

_Absurdities: in Prose and Verse_._

       *       *       *       *       *


BONAPARTE ATTEMPTS SUICIDE.


While we endeavour to sum up the mass of misfortunes with which
Bonaparte was overwhelmed at this crisis, it seems as if Fortune had
been determined to show that she did not intend to reverse the lot of
humanity, even in the case of one who had been so long her favourite,
but that she retained the power of depressing the obscure soldier, whom
she had raised to be almost king of Europe, in a degree as humiliating
as his exaltation had been splendid. All that three years before seemed
inalienable from his person, was now reversed. The victor was defeated,
the monarch was dethroned, the ransomer of prisoners was in captivity,
the general was deserted by his soldiers, the master abandoned by his
domestics, the brother parted from his brethren, the husband severed
from the wife, and the father torn from his only child. To console him
for the fairest and largest empire that ambition ever lorded it over, he
had, with the mock name of emperor, a petty isle, to which he was to
retire, accompanied by the pity of such friends as dared express their
feelings, the unrepressed execrations of many of his former subjects,
who refused to regard his present humiliation as an amends for what he
had made them suffer during his power, and the ill-concealed triumph of
the enemies into whose hands he had been delivered.

A Roman would have seen, in these accumulated disasters, a hint to
direct his sword's point against his breast; a man of better faith would
have turned his eye back on his own conduct, and having read, in his
misuse of prosperity, the original source of those calamities, would
have remained patient and contrite under the consequences of his
ambition. Napoleon belonged to the Roman school of philosophy; and it is
confidently reported, especially by Baron Fain, his secretary, though it
has not been universally believed, that he designed, at this extremity,
to escape from life by an act of suicide.

The emperor, according to this account, had carried with him, ever since
the retreat from Moscow, a packet containing a preparation of opium,
made up in the same manner with that used by Condorcet for
self-destruction. His valet-de-chambre, in the night betwixt the 12th
and 13th of April, heard him arise and pour something into a glass of
water, drink, and return to bed. In a short time afterwards, the man's
attention was called by sobs and stifled groans--an alarm took place in
the chateau--some of the principal persons were roused, and repaired to
Napoleon's chamber. Yvan, the surgeon, who had procured him the poison,
was also summoned; but hearing the emperor complain that the operation
of the poison was not quick enough, he was seized with a panic-terror,
and fled from the palace at full gallop. Napoleon took the remedies
recommended, and a long fit of stupor ensued, with profuse perspiration.
He awakened much exhausted, and surprised at finding himself still
alive; he said aloud, after a few moments' reflection, "Fate will not
have it so," and afterwards appeared reconciled to undergo his destiny,
without similar attempts at personal violence. There is, as we have
already hinted, a difference of opinion concerning the cause of
Napoleon's illness; some imputing it to indigestion. The fact of his
having been very much indisposed is, however, indisputable. A general of
the highest distinction transacted business with Napoleon on the morning
of the 13th of April. He seemed pale and dejected, as from recent and
exhausting illness. His only dress was a night-gown and slippers, and he
drank from time to time a quantity of tisan, or some such liquid, which
was placed beside him, saying he had suffered severely during the night,
but that his complaint had left him.

After this crisis, and having ratified the treaty which his mareschals
had made for him. Napoleon appeared more at his ease than he had been
for some time before, and conversed frankly with his attendants upon the
affairs of France.


NAPOLEON TAKES LEAVE OF THE IMPERIAL GUARD.


Napoleon having now resigned himself entirely to his fate, whether for
good or evil, prepared, on the 20th of April, to depart for his place of
retreat. But first, he had the painful task of bidding farewell to the
body in the universe most attached to him, and to which he was probably
most attached,--his celebrated Imperial Guard. Such of them as could be
collected were drawn out before him in review. Some natural tears
dropped from his eyes, and his features had the marks of strong emotion
while reviewing for the last time, as he must then have thought likely,
the companions of so many victories. He advanced to them on horseback,
dismounted, and took his solemn leave. "All Europe," he said, "had armed
against him; France herself had deserted him, and chosen another
dynasty. He might," he said, "have maintained with his soldiers a civil
war of years, but it would have rendered France unhappy. Be faithful,"
he continued, (and the words were remarkable,) "to the new sovereign
whom France has chosen. Do not lament my fate; I will always be happy
while I know you are so. I could have died--nothing was easier--but I
will always follow the road of honour. I will record with my pen the
deeds we have done together. I cannot embrace you all, but I embrace
your general,"--(he pressed the general to his bosom.)--"Bring hither
the eagle,"--(he embraced the standard, and concluded)--"Beloved eagle,
may the kisses I bestow on you long resound in the hearts of the
brave!--Adieu, my children,--Adieu, my brave companions.--Surround me
once more--Adieu." Drowned in grief, the veteran soldiers heard the
farewell of their dethroned leader; sighs and murmurs broke from their
ranks, but the emotion burst out in no threats or remonstrances. They
appeared resigned to the loss of their general, and to yield, like him,
to necessity.--_Scott's Napoleon_.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ARK OF NOAH


The Rabbins make the giant Gog or Magog contemporary with Noah, and
convinced by his preaching. So that he was disposed to take the benefit
of the Ark. But here lay the distress; it by no means suited his
dimensions. Therefore, as he could not enter in, he contented himself to
ride upon it astride. And though you must suppose that, in that stormy
weather, he was more than half boots over, he kept his seat, and
dismounted safely, when the Ark landed on Mount Ararat. Image now to
yourself this illustrious Cavalier mounted on his _hackney_; and see if
it does not bring before you the Church, bestrid by some lumpish
minister of state, who turns and winds it at his pleasure. The only
difference is, that Gog believed the preacher of righteousness and
religion.--_Warburton's Letters_.

       *       *       *       *       *



THE GATHERER.

    "I am but a _Gatherer_ and disposer of other men's
    stuff."--_Wotton_

       *       *       *       *       *


A preacher had held forth diffusely and ingeniously upon the doctrine
that the Creator of the universe had made all things beautiful. A little
crooked lawyer met him at the church door, and exclaimed, "Well, doctor,
what do you think of my figure? does it correspond with your tenets of
this morning?"--"My friend," replied the preacher, with much gravity,
"you are handsome for a hunch-backed man."

       *       *       *       *       *

Kosciusko once wished to send some bottles of good wine to a clergyman
of Solothurn; and as he hesitated to send them by his servant, lest he
should smuggle a part, he gave the commission to a young man of the name
of Zeltner, and desired him to take the horse which he himself usually
rode. On his return, young Zeltner said that he would never ride his
horse again unless he gave him his purse at the same time. Kosciusko
asking what he meant, he answered, "As soon as a poor man on the road
takes off his hat and asks for charity, the horse immediately stands
still, and won't stir till something is given to the petitioner; and, as
I had no money about me, I was obliged to make believe to give
something, in order to satisfy the horse."

       *       *       *       *       *

Persons in warm countries certainly possess powers of imagination
superior to persons in colder climates. The following description of a
small room will appear very poetic to an English reader: "I am now,"
says a Turkish spy, writing to his employers, "in an apartment so
little, that the least suspicion cannot enter it."

       *       *       *       *       *

An author, as too often happens, was very irritable in his disposition,
and very unfortunate in his productions. His tragedy and comedy had both
been rejected by the managers of both theatres. "I cannot account for
this," said the unfortunate bard to his friend; "for no one can say that
my tragedy was a _sad_ performance, or that my comedy was a thing to
laugh at."

       *       *       *       *       *



_Printed and Published by J. LIMBIRD, 143, Strand, (near Somerset
House,) and sold by all Newsmen and Booksellers._










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror of Literature, Amusement,
and Instruction, Vol. 10, Issue 264, July 14, 1827, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MIRROR OF LITERATURE, JULY 14, 1827 ***

***** This file should be named 9884-8.txt or 9884-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/8/8/9884/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram and Project Gutenberg
Distributed Proofreaders


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
