The Project Gutenberg EBook of Life in London, by Edwin Hodder

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Life in London

Author: Edwin Hodder

Posting Date: November 28, 2011 [EBook #9940]
Release Date: February, 2006
First Posted: November 2, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIFE IN LONDON ***




Produced by Kevin Handy, Dave Maddock, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team











LIFE IN LONDON

OR, THE PITFALLS OF A GREAT CITY

BY EDWIN HODDER, ESQ.

1890.







CONTENTS.

   I. THE INTRODUCTION

  II. SCHOOL-BOY DAYS

 III. STARTING WELL

  IV. MEETING A SCHOOL-FELLOW

   V. A FARCE

  VI. THE LECTURE

 VII. GETTING ON IN THE WORLD

VIII. A TEST OF FRIENDSHIP

  IX. IN EXILE

   X. MAKING DISCOVERIES

  XI. THE SICK CHAMBER




CHAPTER I.

THE INTRODUCTION.


Breathless and excited, George Weston came running down a street in
Islington. He knocked at the door of No. 16, and in his impatience,
until it was opened, commenced a tattoo with his knuckles upon the
panels.

"Oh, mother, mother, I have got such splendid news!" he cried, as he
hurried down stairs into the room where Mrs. Weston, with her apron on
and sleeves tucked up, was busy in her domestic affairs. "Such splendid
news!" repeated George. "I have been down to Mr. Compton's with the
letter Uncle Henry gave me, in which he said I wanted a situation, and
should be glad if Mr. Compton could help me; and, sure enough, I was
able to see him, and he is such a kind, fatherly old gentlemen, mother.
I am sure I shall like him."

"Well, George, and what did he say!"

"Oh! I've got ever so much to tell you, before I come to that part. The
office, you know, is in Falcon Court, Fleet Street; such a dismal place,
with the houses all crammed together, and a little space in front, not
more than large enough to turn a baker's bread-truck in. All the windows
are of ground glass, as if the people inside were too busy to see out,
or to be seen; and on every door there are lots of names of people who
have their offices there, and some of them are actually right up at the
top storeys of the houses. Well, I found out the name of Mr. Compton,
and I tapped at a door where 'Clerk's Office' was written. I think I
ought not to have tapped, but to have gone in, for somebody said rather
sharply, 'Come in,' and in I went. An old gentleman was standing beside
a sort of counter, with a lot of heavy books on it, and he asked me what
I wanted. I said I wanted to see Mr. Compton, and had got a letter for
him. He told me to sit down until Mr. Compton was disengaged, and then
he would see me."

"And what sort of an office was it, George? And who was the old
gentleman? The manager, I suppose!"

"I think he was, because he seemed to do as he liked, and all the clerks
talked in a whisper while he was there. I had to wait more than
half-an-hour, and I was able to look round and see all that was going
on. It is a large office, and there were ten clerks seated on
uncomfortable high stools, without backs, poring over books and papers.
I don't think I shall like those clerks, they stared at me so rudely,
and I felt so ashamed, because one looked hard at me, and then whispered
to another: and I believe they were saying something about my boots,
which you know, mother, are terribly down at heel, and so I put one foot
over the other, to try and hide them."

"There was no need of that, George. It did not alter the fact that they
were down at heel; and there is no disgrace in being clothed only as
respectable as we can afford, is there?"

"Not a bit, mother: and I feel so vexed with myself because I knew I
turned red, which made the two clerks smile. But I must go on telling
you what else I saw. The old gentleman seems quite a character--he is
nearly bald, has got no whiskers, wears a big white neckcloth and a tail
coat, and takes snuff every five minutes out of a silver box. Whether he
knows it or not, the clerks are very rude to him: for when he took
snuff, one of them sneezed, or pretended to sneeze, every time, and
another snuffled, as if he were taking snuff too."

"That certainly does not speak well for the clerks," said Mrs. Weston.
"Old gentlemen do have peculiar ways sometimes, but it is not right for
young people to ridicule them."

"No, it is not; and I don't like to see people do a thing behind another
one's back they are afraid to do before his face. When the clerks had to
speak to the old gentleman, they were as civil as possible, and said,
'Yes, sir,' and 'No, sir,' to him so meekly, as if they were quite
afraid of him; but after a little while, when he took up his hat and
went out, they all began talking and laughing out loud, although when he
was there, they had only occasionally spoken in low whispers. There was
only one young man, out of the whole lot, who did not join with them,
but kept at his work; and I thought if I got a situation in that office,
I should try and make friends with him."

"That's right, George. I would rather you should not have a situation at
all, than get mixed up with bad companions. But go on, I am so anxious
to hear what Mr. Compton said."

"Well, after half-an-hour, I heard a door in the next room close, and a
table-bell touched, and then the old gentleman, who had by this time
returned, went in Presently he came out again, and said Mr. Compton
would see me. Oh, mother! I felt so funny, you don't know. My mouth got
quite dry, my face flushed, and I couldn't think whatever I should say,
I felt just as I did that day at the school examination, when I had to
make one of the prize speeches. But I got all to rights directly I saw
Mr. Compton. He said, 'Good morning to you--be seated,' in such a nice
way, that I felt at home with him at once."

"And what did you say to him, George?"

"I had learnt by heart what I was going to say, but in the hurry I had
forgotten every word. So I said, 'My name is--' (it's a wonder I did not
say Norval, for I felt a bit bewildered at the sound of my own voice)
'--my name is George Weston, sir, and I have brought you a letter from
my uncle, Mr. Henry Brunton, who knows you, I think.' 'Oh! yes," he
said, 'he knows me very well; and, if I mistake not, this letter is
about you, for he was talking to me about a nephew the other day.' Isn't
that just like Uncle Henry?--he never said anything about that to us,
but he is so good and kind, we are always finding out some of his
generous actions, about which he never speaks. While Mr. Compton was
reading the letter, I had leisure to look at him, and at his room. He is
such a fine-looking old man, just like that picture we saw in the
Academy, last year, of the village squire. He looks as if he were very
benevolent and kind-hearted, and he dresses just like some of the
country gentlemen, with a dark green coat and velvet collar, a frill
shirt, and a little bit of buf. waistcoat seen under his coat, which he
keeps buttoned. He had got lots of books, and papers, and files about,
and sat hi an arm-chair so cosily--in fact, I should not have thought
that nice carpeted room was really an office, if it had not been for the
ground-glass windows. Just as I was thinking why it was the glorious
sunshine is not admitted into offices, Mr. Compton said--"

"What did he say, George? I have waited so patiently to hear."

"He said, 'Well, _Mr_. Weston,'--(he did really call me Mr. Weston,
mother; I suppose he took me for a young man: it is evident he did not
know I was wearing a stick-up shirt collar for the first time in my
life)--'I have read this letter, and am inclined to think I may be able
to do something for you.' That put my 'spirits up,' as poor father used
to say; and I said, 'I'm very glad to hear it, Sir.' So then he told me
that he wanted a junior clerk in his office, who could write quickly, be
brisk at accounts, and make himself generally useful, as the
advertisements in the _Times_ say. I told him I could do all these
things; and he passed me a sheet of paper, to give him a specimen of my
handwriting. I hardly knew what to write, but I fixed upon a passage of
Scripture, 'Not slothful in business, fervent in spirit, serving the
Lord.' My hand was so shaky, that all the letters with tails to them had
the queerest flourishes you ever saw. Mr. Compton smiled when I handed
him the sheet of paper--I don't know whether it was at the writing, or
at the quotation, and I wished I had written a passage from Seneca
instead!"

"You did not feel ashamed at having written a part of God's word, did
you, George?"

"No, not ashamed, mother; but I thought it was not business-like, and
seemed too much like a schoolboy."

"I think it was very business-like. It would convey the idea that you
would seek to do your business from the best and highest motives. But
what did Mr. Compton say?"

"He only said he thought the handwriting was good. Then he told me that
he would take me as his clerk, and should expect me to be at my post
next Monday morning, at nine o'clock. 'And now,' he said, 'we must fix
upon a salary; and as your uncle has told me that you are anxious to
maintain yourself, I will give you a weekly sum sufficient for that
purpose; and if you give me satisfaction, I will raise it yearly.' And
what do you think he offered me, mother?"

"I really do not know; perhaps, as you are young, and have never been in
a situation before, he said five shillings a week, although I did not
think you would get any salary at all for the first six months."

"No, mother, more than five shillings; guess again," said George, his
face shining with excited delight.

"Then I will guess seven and sixpence a week," said his mother,
doubtfully, for she thought she had gone too high.

"More than that, mother; guess only once more, for I cannot keep it in
if you are not very quick."

"Then I shall say ten shillings a week, George; but I am afraid I have
guessed too much."

"No, mother, under the mark again. I am to have ten shillings and
sixpence--half a guinea a week! Isn't that splendid? Only fancy, Mr.
George Weston, Junior Clerk to Mr. Compton, at half-a-guinea a week! My
fortune is made; and, depend upon it, mother, we shall get on in the
world now, first-rate. Why, I shall only want--say, half-a-crown a week
for myself, and then there will be all the rest for you. Now don't you
think blind-eyed Fortune must have dropped her bandage this morning, and
have spied me out?"

"No, George; but I think that kind Providence; which has always smiled
upon us when we have been in the greatest difficulties, has once more
shown us that all our ways are in the hands of One who doeth all things
well."

"So do I, mother; and I do hope that this success, which has attended my
journey this morning, may turn out to our real good. I feel it will--we
shall be able to go on now so swimmingly, and I shall be getting a
footing in the world, so that by-and-bye we shan't have a single debt,
or a single care, and you will be growing younger as fast as I grow
older: and then, after a time, we will get a little house in the
country, and finish up our days the happiest couple in the British
dominions."

For the remainder of that day, poor George was in a regular whirl of
excitement. A thousand schemes were afloat in his mind about the future,
of the most improbable kind. His income of half-a-guinea a week was to
do wonders, which were never accomplished by half a score of guineas.
He speculated about the rise in his salary at the end of the year, which
he was determined, if it rested upon his own industry, should not be
less than a pound a week; and then he forgot the first year, and
commenced calculating what he could do, with his increased salary, till,
at last, worn out with scheming, he said,--

"Money is a great bother, after all, mother. I've been calculating all
this day how we can spend my salary; and I am really more perplexed than
if Mr. Compton had said I should not have anything for the first six
months. I can't make ends meet if I attempt to do what I have planned,
that's very certain; so I shall quietly wait till the first Saturday
night comes, and I feel the half-guinea in my hand, and then I shall
better realize what it is worth."

That was a pleasant evening Mrs. Weston and George spent together in
discussing the events of the day, and when it became time to separate
for the night, she said--

"This is one of the happiest days we have spent for a long time, George.
How your poor father would have enjoyed sharing it with us!" and the
widow sighed.

"Mother," said George, "I have thought of poor father so many times
to-day, and I have formed a resolution which I mean to try and keep. He
was a good man. I don't think he ever did anything really wrong--and I
recollect so well what he used to tell me, when I was a boy"--(George
had jumped into manhood in a day, he fancied)--"I mean to take him for a
model; and if I find myself placed in dangers and difficulties, I shall
always ask myself, 'What would father have done if he had been in this
case?' and then I should try and do as he would."

"May you have strength given to you, my deal boy, to carry out every
good resolution! But remember, there is a model which must be taken even
before that of your father. I mean the pure, sinless example of our
Lord; follow this, and adhere to the plain directions of God's word, and
you cannot go wrong. And now, good night; God bless you, my son!"

It was a long time before George went to sleep; again and again the
events of the day came to his memory, and he travelled in thought far
into the future, peering through the mist which hung over unborn time,
and weighing circumstances which might never have a being.

"I shall be quite accustomed to my duties by next Monday," he said to
his mother in the morning; "for I was all night long busy in the office,
counting money, posting books, and when I awoke I was just signing a
deed of partnership in the name of Compton and Weston."




CHAPTER II.

SCHOOL-BOY DAYS.


George Weston was an only son, and, at the time our story commences, was
nearly seventeen years of age. His early years had been spent at home,
under the watchful care of kind and good parents. When he was ten years
old he was sent to a boarding school at Folkestone, and placed in the
charge of Dr. Seaward, a good man, who superintended his education, and,
besides imparting secular instruction, endeavoured to train his
character and make him good as well as clever. George was a sharp,
shrewd boy, a keen observer, who would know the why and the wherefore of
everything, and his lessons always came to him more as an amusement than
a task. He had a horror of being low down in his class, and if he did
not retain his place at the top, it was rarely through inattention or
want of study on his part.

George was a great favourite with the whole school; he was a merry,
joyous fellow, who always had sunshine in his face and a kind word on
his lips; a ringleader in any harmless fun, and a champion on the side
of all the younger boys who met with oppression or injustice from the
elder classes. At cricket or football, swimming or boating, George had
few superiors; and as he was one of those boys who seem determined,
whatever they do, to do it with all their might, he went heart and soul
into all the spoils with such a zest and earnestness that he acquired
the name of the "Indefatigable." Nor did this name merely apply to his
zeal in sports. There was not in the whole school a more diligent
student than George: there was for him "a time to work and a time to
play," and he never allowed one to trespass upon the other. He would
rather go without a game at cricket for a fortnight than be behindhand
in one of his lessons. The boys would laugh at him for this, but George
could bear to be laughed at on such points, because he knew he was in
the right. "I came to school to learn," he would say, "and I don't see
any fun in making my parents pay heavy fees for me every year to play
cricket at the expense of study." Every boy knew there was wisdom in
this, and they secretly admired George for it, although it condemned
their own conduct, more especially when they had to go to him not
unfrequently, and say, "Weston, I shall get in a scrape with these
lessons to-morrow, unless you can help me a bit with them. Do give me a
leg up, that's a good fellow!" and though George never said "No," he did
sometimes take an opportunity to say, "If you did not waste so much time
in play, you might be independent of any help that I can give."

It was a source of great pleasure to his parents to hear from time to
time, through Dr. Seaward, some good account of his conduct; and when he
returned home at the holiday seasons, generally laden with prizes which
he had victoriously borne off, they did not feel a little proud of their
only son.

George remained at the school at Folkestone for five years, during which
time he rose from the lowest to the highest form. It was the intention
of his parents then to place him in a college for a year or two, in
order to give him in opportunity to complete his education, and have the
means to make a good start in life. But this purpose was frustrated by
an event which happened only a month before George was to have been
removed.

One day, when all the boys were out in the playfield, busily engaged in
marking out boundaries for a game at hockey, Dr. Seaward was seen coming
from the house towards the field. This was an unusual event, as he
rarely interfered with them during play hours. "Something's up," said
the boys; and waited expectantly until the Doctor came up to them.

"Call George Weston," said he; "I want to speak to him."

"Weston! George Weston!" shouted one or two at once; and George came
running up, nothing abashed, for he knew he had done nothing wrong.

"George," said the Doctor, laying a hand on his shoulder, "I want you to
come with me; I have something to tell you;" and they walked together
away from the field.

"What is it, sir? You look pained: I hope I have done nothing to offend
you?"

"No, George," replied the Doctor; "few lads have ever given me so little
cause of offence at any time as you have. But I _am_ pained. I have some
sad news to tell you."

"Sad news for me, sir? Oh, do tell me at once. Is anything the matter at
home?"

"Yes, George; a messenger has just arrived to say that your father has
met with a serious accident; he has been thrown from his chaise, and is
much hurt. The messenger is your uncle, Mr. Brunton; and he desires you
to return at once to London with him."

George waited to hear no more; he bounded away from the Doctor, cleared
the fence which enclosed the garden at a leap, and rushed into the room
where Mr. Brunton was anxiously awaiting him. No tear stood in his eye;
but he was dreadfully pale, and his hands trembled like aspen leaves.
"Oh, uncle!" was all he could say; and, throwing himself into a chair,
he covered his face with his hands.

"Come, George, my boy," said Mr. Brunton, tenderly; "do not give way to
distress. Your poor father is seriously hurt, but he is yet alive. We
have just half an hour to catch the train."

That was enough for George; in a moment he was calm and collected, ran
up to his room to make a few hasty arrangements, and in five minutes was
again with his uncle prepared for the journey.

"Good-bye, Dr. Seaward," he said as he left the house.

"God bless you, my young friend," said the kind-hearted Doctor; "and
grant that you may find His providence better than your fears."

George thought he had never known the train go so slowly as it did
during that long, wearisome journey to London. At last it arrived at
the terminus, and then, jumping into a cab, they were hurried away
towards Stamford Hill as quickly as the horse could travel.

"Now, George," said Mr. Brunton, as they came near their journey's end,
"we know not what may have happened while we have been coming here. Be a
man, and recollect there is one who suffers more than you."

"Do not fear, uncle. I will not add to my mother's grief," was all he
could reply.

We will not pry into that interview between mother and son when they
first met; there is a grief too solemn for a stranger's eye.

Mr. Weston was still alive, and that was all that could be said. The
doctors had pronounced his case beyond human skill, and had intimated
that there were but a few hours for him on earth.

As George stood beside the bed of his dying father, the tears which had
been long pent up came pouring thick and fast down his cheek.

"Don't give way to sorrow, George," said his father, in a low voice, for
he had difficulty in speaking; "it will be only a little while before we
meet again; for what is life but a vapour, which soon vanisheth away?"

"Oh, father, it is so sudden, so sudden!" sobbed George.

"Therefore, my boy, remember that at all times there is but a step
between us and death; and if for us to live is Christ, then to die is
gain. Make that your motto through life, my dear boy, 'For me to live is
Christ.'"

That night the silver cord was loosed, the golden bowl was broken, and
the spirit of Mr. Weston returned to God who gave it. "Precious in the
eyes of the Lord is the death of His saints."

Never did a mother more realize the joy of possessing the unbounded love
of an affectionate son, than did Mrs. Weston during those melancholy
days between the death and the funeral of her husband, "Cheer up, dear
mother," he would say; "God is the father of the fatherless, and the
husband of the widow, and did not _He_ say 'to die is gain'?"

George and Mr. Brunton followed the remains of the good man to their
last resting-place; and then the body was lowered to the grave "in the
sure and certain hope of a glorious resurrection."

Mr. Weston had not been a rich man, nor had he been a far-seeing,
provident man. He had moved in comfortable circumstances, with an income
only sufficient to pay his way in the world, and had made but scanty
provision for the future. At the time of his sudden death, his affairs
were in anything but a satisfactory state; and it was found that it
would be impossible for his widow to live in the same comfortable style
she had formerly done.

After all his accounts were wound up, it was seen that she would only
have a sufficient sum of money, even if invested in the best possible
manner, to keep her in humble circumstances. She determined therefore to
leave her house at Stamford Hill, and take a smaller one in Islington,
and let some of the rooms to boarders.

Mr. Brunton acted the part of a kind brother in all her difficulties; he
was never wearied in advising her, and on him principally devolved all
the necessary arrangements for her removal. Everything he did was with
such delicacy and refinement that, although his hand was daily and
hourly felt, it was never seen.

One evening, shortly before leaving the locality in which they had lived
so many years, George and his mother walked together to the cemetery
where Mr. Weston had been buried, to pay a farewell visit to that
hallowed spot. They had been too much reduced in circumstances to have a
stone placed over the grave where he lay, and they were talking about it
as they journeyed along, saying, how the very first money they could
afford should be expended for that purpose. What was their surprise to
find a handsome stone raised above the spot, bearing these words:--

     _Sacred to the Memory of_
     MR. GEORGE WESTON,
     Who departed this life, Feb. 18th, 18--, aged 46 years.

       *       *       *       *       *

     "For me to live is Christ, and to die is gain."

Tears of grateful joy stood in their eyes as they recognized another
token of the kind, tender love of Mr. Brunton.

The bereavement and change of fortune were borne by the widow with that
fortitude which is only shown by the true Christian. It was hard, very
hard, to begin the world again; to be denied the pleasure of allowing
George to go to college and complete his studies; and to bear the
struggles and inconveniences of poverty. But Mrs. Weston knew that vain
regrets would never alter the case; the Lord had given, the Lord had
taken away, and from her heart she could say cheerfully, "Blessed be
the name of the Lord."

George had not been idle. Every hour in which he was not occupied for or
with his mother, he was diligently engaged in prosecuting his studies,
and preparing himself for the time when he should be able to procure a
situation. Mr. Brunton had not been anxious for him to enter upon one at
once; he knew how lonely the widow would be without her son, and
therefore he did not take any steps to obtain for George a situation.
But when a twelvemonth had passed, and the keenness of sorrow had worn
off, he mentioned the matter to his friend Mr. Compton; with what
success we have seen in the first chapter.




CHAPTER III.

STARTING WELL.


Never did days drag along more heavily than those which elapsed between
the interview with Mr. Compton, and the morning when George was to enter
upon his new duties. Every day the office was a subject of much
conversation; and neither George nor his mother ever seemed to weary in
talking over his plans and purposes. George wrote a long letter to Mr.
Brunton, telling him of the successful issue of his application to Mr.
Compton, and thanking him in the most hearty way for all his kindness.
The next day Mr. Brunton replied to George's letter as follows:--

    "MY DEAR NEPHEW,

    "I am delighted to hear that you have obtained an appointment, and
    that you seem so well satisfied with your prospects. May you find it
    to be for your good in every way. Remember, you are going into new
    scenes, and will be surrounded with many dangers and temptations to
    which you have hitherto been a stranger. Seek to be strong against
    everything that is evil; aim at the highest mark, and press towards
    it. Much of your future depends upon how you begin--therefore begin
    well; hold yourself aloof from everything with which your conscience
    tells you you should not be associated, and then all your bright
    dreams may, I hope, be fully realized.

    "I shall hope to be with you for an hour or two on Sunday evening.

    "You will have some unavoidable expenses to incur before entering
    upon your duties, and will require a little pocket-money. Accept the
    enclosed cheque, with the love of

    "Your affectionate Uncle,

    "HENRY BRUNTON."

George's eyes sparkled with delight as he read the letter; and found the
enclosure to be a cheque for five pounds. This was a great treasure and
relief to him, for he had thought many times about his boots, which were
down at heel, and his best coat, which shone a good deal about the
elbows, and showed symptoms of decay in the neighbourhood of the
button-holes.

A new suit of clothes and a pair of boots were therefore purchased at
once, and when Sunday morning came, and George dressed himself in them,
and stood ready to accompany his mother to the house of God, she thought
(although, of course, she did not say so) that she had never seen a more
handsome and gentlemanly-looking youth than her son.

"Mother," said George, as they walked along, "what a treat the Sunday
will always be now, after being pent up in the office all the week. I
shall look forward to it with such pleasure, not only for the sake of
its rest, but because I shall have a whole day with you."

"The Sabbath is, indeed, a boon," replied Mrs. Weston, "when it is made
a rest-day for the soul, as well as for the body. You remember those
lines I taught you, when you were quite another fellow, before you went
to school, do you not?--

     "'A Sunday well spent brings a week of content
       And health for the toils of the morrow;
     But a Sabbath profaned, whatsoe'er may be gained,
       Is a certain forerunner of sorrow.'"

"Yes, mother, I remember them; and capital lines they are. Dr. Seaward
once said, 'Strike the key-note of your tune incorrectly, and the whole
song will be inharmonious;' so, if the Sabbath is improperly spent, the
week will generally be like it."

That morning the preacher took for his text the beautiful words in
Isaiah xli. 10, "Fear thou not, for I am with thee: be not dismayed, for
I am thy God: I will strengthen thee--yea, I will help thee yea, I will
uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness." These words came
like the sound of heavenly music into the soul of the widow; and she
prayed, with the fervency a mother alone can pray for a beloved and only
son, that the time might speedily come when he would be able to
appropriate these words, and realize, in the true sense of the term, God
as his Father. For George, although he had from early infancy been
brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, and had learnt to
love holiness from so constantly seeing its beauty exemplified by his
parents, had not yet undergone that one great change which creates the
soul anew in Christ Jesus.

Mr. Brunton arrived in the evening, just as Mrs. Weston and George were
starting out to the second service, and so they all went together to the
same place. The minister, an excellent man, who felt the responsibility
of his office, and took every opportunity of doing good, was in the
habit of giving four sermons a year especially to young men, and it so
happened that on this evening one of these discourses was to be
delivered. Nothing could have been more appropriate to a young man just
starting out in life than his address. The text was taken from those
solemn, striking words of the wise man, "My son, if sinners entice
thee, consent thou not."

He spoke of the powerful influences continually at work to allure young
travellers along life's journey into the snares and pitfalls of sin, and
pointed to God's armoury, and the refuge from all the wiles of the
adversary.

As the trio sat round the supper-table that evening, discussing the
events of the day, George said--

"I feel very glad that this Sunday has come before I go to Mr.
Compton's. I thought, when the text was given out this evening, that the
minister had prepared his sermon especially for me. I have no doubt all
he said was quite true; and so, being prepared, I shall be able to be on
my guard against the evils which he says are common to those who make
their first start in life."

When Mr. Brunton rose to leave that night, he took George aside; and,
laying his hand on his shoulder, said--

"George, I am glad you have got your appointment, my boy; but I am
sorry, for some reasons, that it is in Mr. Compton's office, for I have
made inquiries about the clerks there, and I regret to find that they
are not the set of young men I should have liked you to be with. Now, I
want you to make me a promise. If ever you are placed in critical
circumstances, or dangers, or difficulties (I say _if_, because I do not
know why you should, but _if_ you are), be sure and come to me. Tell me,
as you always have done, honestly and openly, your difficulty, and you
will always find in me one willing to advise and assist you. Will you
promise?"

"With all my heart I will, uncle; and thank you, too, for this, and all
your interests on my account."

"Good-bye, then, George. Go on and prosper; and God bless you."

Punctually at nine o'clock on Monday morning, George was at the office.
Mr. Sanders, the manager (the old gentleman whom George had seen on his
first visit), introduced him to the clerks by saying--

"This is Mr. George Weston, our new junior;" and George, with his face
all aglow, made a general bow in return to the salutations which were
given him.

"This is to be your seat," said Mr. Sanders; "and that peg is for your
hat. And now, as you would, no doubt, like to begin at once, here is a
document I want copied."

George was glad to have something to do; he felt all eyes were upon him,
and the whispered voices of the clerks rather grated upon his ears. He
took up his pen, and began to write; but he found his hand shaky, and he
was so confused that, after he had written half a page, and found he had
made two or three blunders, he was obliged to take a fresh sheet, and
begin again.

"Take your time," said Mr. Sanders, who noticed his dilemma; "you will
get on right enough by-and-bye, when you are more accustomed to the
place and the work."

George felt relieved by this; and making up his mind to try and forget
all around him, he set to work busily again, and in an hour or two had
finished the job.

"I have done this, sir," he said, taking it to Mr. Sanders. "What shall
I do next?"

"We will just examine it, and then you may take it into Mr. Compton's
room. After that you can go and get your dinner, and be back again in an
hour."

The document was examined, and, to the surprise of George and Mr.
Sanders, not one mistake was found. "Come, this is beginning well," said
the manager; "we shall soon make a clerk of you, I see."

When George went into Mr. Compton's room, and presented the papers, he
was again rewarded with an encouraging commendation. "This is very well
written--very well written indeed, and shows great painstaking," he
said.

George felt he could have shaken hands with both principal and manager
for those few words. "How cheap a kind word is," he thought, "to those
who give it; but it is more precious than gold to the receiver. I like
these two men; and, if I can manage it, they shall like me too."

George had not as yet exchanged a word with any of the clerks; but as he
was leaving the office to go to dinner, one of them was going out at the
same time, on the same errand.

"Well, Mr. Weston, you find it precious dull, don't you, cooped up in
your den?"

"Do you mean the office?" said George.

"Yes; what else should I mean?"

"It seems a comfortable office enough," said George, "and not
particularly dull; but I have not had sufficient experience in it to
judge."

"You see, that old ogre (I beg his pardon, I mean old Sanders) takes
jolly good care there shall be no flinching from work while he's there,
and it makes a fellow deuced tired, pegging away all day long."

"If this is a specimen of the clerks," thought George, "Uncle Brunton
was not far wrong when he said they were not a very good set."

"From what I have seen of Mr. Sanders," he said, "I think him a very
nice man! and as for work, I always thought that was what clerks were
engaged to do, and therefore it is their duty to do it, whether under
the eye of the manager or not."

George got this sentence out with some difficulty. He felt it was an
aggressive step, and did not doubt it would go the round of the office
as a tale against him.

"Ugh!" said the clerk; "you've got a thing or two to learn yet, I see.
You must surely be fresh and green from the country; but such notions
soon die out. I don't like to be personal though, so we'll change the
subject. Where are you going to dine? Most of our chaps patronize the
King's Head--first-rate place; get anything you like in two twinklings
of a lamb's tail. I'm going there now; will you go? By the way, I should
have told you before this that my name is Williams."

"I suppose, Mr. Williams,' the King's Head is a tavern? If so, I prefer
a coffee-house; but thank you, notwithstanding, for your offer."

"By George! that's a rum start. Our chaps all hate coffee-shops, with
the exception of young Hardy, and he's coming round to our tastes now.
You can get a good feed at the King's Head--stunning tackle in the shape
of beer, and meet a decent set of fellows who know how to crack a joke
at table; whereas, if you go to a coffee-shop, you have an ugly slice of
meat set before you, a jorum of tea leaves and water, or some other
mess, and a disagreeable set of people around. Now, which is best?"

"Your description is certainly unfavourable in the latter case; but I do
not suppose all coffeehouses are alike, and therefore I shall try one
to-day. Good morning."

George soon found a nice-looking quiet place where he could dine, and
felt sure he had no need to go to taverns for better accommodation.

When he returned to the office, at two o'clock, Mr. Sanders was absent,
and the clerks were busily engaged, not at work, but in conversation.
Mr. Williams was the principal speaker, and seemed to have something
very choice to communicate. George made no doubt that he was the subject
of conversation, for he had caught one or two words as he entered, which
warranted the supposition. He had nothing to do until Mr. Sanders
returned; this was an opportunity, therefore, for Mr. Williams to make
himself officious.

"Mr. Weston," he said, "allow me to do the honours of the office by
introducing you, in a more definite manner than that old ----, I mean
than Mr. Sanders did this morning. This gentleman is Mr. Lawson, this is
Mr. Allwood, this is Mr. Malcolm, and this my young friend, Mr. Charles
Hardy, who is of a serious turn of mind, and is meditating entering the
ministry, or the undertaking line."

A laugh at Hardy's expense was the result of this attempt at jocularity
on the part of Mr. Williams. George hardly knew how to acknowledge these
introductions; but, turning to Charles Hardy, he said,--

"As Mr. Williams has so candidly mentioned your qualities, Mr. Hardy,
perhaps you will favour me with a description of his."

Hardy rose from his seat, for up to this time he had been engaged in
writing, and, in a tone of mock gravity, replied,

"This is Mr. Williams, who lives at the antipodes of everything that is
quiet or serious, whose mission to the earth seems expressly to turn
everything he touches into a laugh. He is not a 'youth to fortune and
to fame unknown,' for in the archives of the King's Head his name is
emblazoned in imperishable characters."

"Well said, Hardy!" said one or two at once. "Now, Williams, you are on
your mettle, old boy; stand true to your colours, and transmute the
sentence into a joke in self-defence."

Williams was on the point of replying when Mr. Sanders entered. In an
instant all the clerks pretended to be up to their eyes in business;
each had his book or papers to hand as if by magic; whether upside down
or not was immaterial.

But George Weston stood where he was; he could not condescend to so mean
an imposition, and he felt pleased to see that Charles Hardy, unlike the
others, made no attempt to hide the fact that he had been engaged in
conversation, instead of continuing at his work.

At six o'clock the day's duties were over; and George felt not a little
pleased when the hour struck, and Mr. Sanders told him he could go.
Hardy was leaving just at the same time, and so they went out together.

"Are you going anywhere in my direction?" said Hardy; "I live at
Canonbury."

"Indeed!" replied George; "I'm glad to hear that, for I live at
Islington, close by you. If you are willing, we will bear one another
company, for I want to ask you one or two questions;" and taking Hardy's
arm, the two strolled homewards together.

Now George would never have thought of walking arm in-arm with Mr.
Williams, or any of the other clerks; but, from the first time he saw
Hardy, and noticed his quiet, gentlemanly manners, he felt sure he
should like him. Hardy, too, had evidently taken a fancy to George; and
therefore both felt pleased that accident had brought them together.
Accident? No, that is a wrong word; whenever a heart feels that there is
another heart beating like its own, and those two hearts go out one
towards the other, until they become knit together in the bonds of
friendship, there is something more than accident in that.

"How long have you been in Mr. Compton's office?" said George, as they
walked along,

"Nearly two years," he replied; "I went there as soon as I left school.
I was then about seventeen years old; and there I have been ever since."

"Then you are my senior by two years," said George. "I left school a
year ago, and this is my first situation. How do you like the office?"

"Do you mean my particular seat, the clerks, or the duties, or all
combined?"

"I should like to know how you like the whole combined."

"I prefer my desk to yours, because I sit next to Mr. Malcolm, who is
one of the steadiest and most respectable clerks in the office; and
therefore I am not subject to so much annoyance as you will be, seated
next to that empty-headed Williams, and coarse low-minded Lawson. I do
not really like any of the clerks; there are none of them the sort of
young men I should choose as companions. As to the duties, they are
agreeable enough, and I have nothing to find fault with on that score."

"I tell you candidly," said George, "I am not prepossessed in favour of
the clerks; they are far too 'fast' a set to please me; but I am very
glad, for my own sake, that you are in the office, Mr. Hardy."

"Why?"

"Because, although we are almost strangers at present, I know I shall
find in you some one who will be companionable. You don't seem very
thick with the others; you don't join with them in that mean practice of
shirking work directly Mr. Sanders's back is turned; and you don't, from
what I have heard, approve of the society at the King's Head, in which
the others seem to take so much delight. Now, in these points, I think,
our tastes are similar."

"Ah! Mr. Weston," said Hardy, "you will find, as I have done, that
amongst such a set we are obliged to allow a great many things we do not
approve. But I'm very glad you have come amongst us; unity is strength,
you know, and two can make a better opposition than one. Now, will you
let me give you a hint?"

"Certainly," said George.

"Be on your guard with Lawson and Williams; they are two dangerous young
men, and can do no end of mischief, because they are double-faced--sneaking
sometimes, and bullying at others. I don't know whether you have heard
that you are filling a vacancy caused by one of our clerks leaving the
office in disgrace. It is not worth while my telling you the story now,
but that poor chap would never have left in the way he did, had it not
been for Lawson and Williams."

"Many thanks, Mr. Hardy, for your information and advice, upon which I
will endeavour to act. And now, as our roads lay differently, we must
say good evening."

"Adieu, then, till to-morrow," said Hardy. "By-the-bye, I pass this
road in the morning, at half-past eight; if you are here we will walk to
the office together."

It took George the whole of the evening to give his mother a full
account of the day's proceedings; there were so many questions to ask on
her part, and so many descriptions to give on his, and such a number of
events occurred during the day, that it seemed as if he had at least a
week's experience to narrate.

"I like Hardy, mother," said George, once or twice during the evening;
"he is such a thorough open-hearted fellow, and I know we shall get
along together capitally."

"I hope so, my boy," said his mother; "but be very careful how you form
any other friendships."

When Mrs. Western retired to her room for the night, it was not to
sleep. She felt anxious and uneasy about George; she thought of him as
the loving, gentle child, the merry, light-hearted boy, and the manly,
conscientious youth. Then she thought of the future. How would he stand
against the evil influences surrounding him? Would his frank, ingenuous
manner change, and the confidence he always reposed in her cease? Would
he be led away by the gay and thoughtless young men with whom he would
be associated?

Tears gathered in the widow's eyes, and many a sigh sounded in that
quiet room; but Mrs. Weston had a Friend at hand, to whom she could go
and pour out all her anxieties. She would cast her burden on Him, for
she knew He cared for her. As she knelt before the mercy-seat, these
were her prayers:--

"Lord, create in him a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within him.
May he remember Thee in the days of his youth. Heavenly Father, lead him
not into temptation, but deliver him from evil Guide him by Thy counsel,
and lead him in the paths of righteousness, for Thy Name's sake."




CHAPTER IV.

MEETING A SCHOOL-FELLOW.


Six months passed rapidly away. George continued to give satisfaction to
Mr. Compton, soon learnt the office routine, and earned the warmest
expressions of approbation from Mr. Sanders, who said he was the best
junior clerk he ever remembered to have entered that office.

George had carefully guarded against forming any kind of intimacy with
the other clerks; he had declined to have more to say to them during
office hours than possible, and when business was over he purposely
shunned them. But a strong friendship had sprung up between him and
Charles Hardy; every morning they came to the city together, and
returned in company in the evening. Sometimes George would spend an
evening at the house of Hardy's parents, and Hardy, in like manner,
would occasionally spend an evening with George.

Williams and Lawson had, as Hardy predicted, been a source of great
annoyance to George. He was constantly obliged to bear their ridicule
because he would not conform to their habits, and sometimes the insults
he received were almost beyond his power of endurance. He and Hardy
received the name of the "Siamese youths," and were generally greeted
with such salutations as "How d'ye do? Is mamma pretty well?"--or
something equally galling. But George bore it all with exemplary
patience, and he did not doubt that after a while they would grow tired
of annoying him. At all events, he felt certain some new policy would be
adopted by them; for he had so risen in the estimation of his employer,
who began to repose confidence in him, and entrust him with more
important matters than he allowed the others to interfere with, that
George anticipated the time when the clerks would either be glad to
curry favour with him, or at least have to acknowledge that he was
regarded more highly than they were.

So matters went on. Mrs. Weston was full of joy as she saw how well
George had kept his resolutions, and full of hope that he would continue
as he had begun.

Mr. Brunton had given him many kind encouragements during this time, and
had felt himself well rewarded for all his trouble on George's behalf
by hearing from Mr. Compton of the satisfaction his services had given.

And now an event occurred, simple and unimportant in itself, and yet it
was one that affected the whole of George's after-life.

One evening, as he was leaving the office, and had just turned into
Fleet-street, a nice-looking, fashionably-dressed young man came running
up, and, clapping him on the shoulder, exclaimed,

"What! George Weston, my old pippin, who ever thought of turning you up
in London!"

"Harry Ashton! my old school-chum, how are you?" and the two friends
shook hands with a heartiness that surprised the passers-by.

"Where ever have you been to, all these long years, George?" said Aston;
"only fancy, we have never seen each other since that day we were
playing hockey at dear old Dr. Seaward's, and you were hastily called
away to London. The Doctor told us the sad news, and we all felt for you
deeply, old fellow; in fact I never recollect the place having been so
gloomy before or since."

"It was a sad time for me," said George; "and after that I lived at home
for a twelvemonth. Then I got an appointment in an office in
Falcon-court, and have held it just six months. Now, tell me where you
have sprung from, and where you have been since I last saw you?"

"I stayed only six months longer at Dr. Seaward's and was then articled
to a surveyor in the Strand, with whom I have been nearly a year, and
now I am bound for my lodgings, and you must come with me."

"You had better come with me," said George; "my mother will be so
pleased to welcome an old school-fellow of mine, and she is not
altogether a stranger to you."

"Thank you, old fellow," replied Ashton; "I shall be very glad to accept
your invitation some other night; but, after our long separation, we
want to have a quiet, confidential chat over old times together, and I
must introduce you to my crib. I am a bachelor--all alone in my glory.
The old folks still live in the country, and I boarded at first in a
family; but that that was terribly slow work, and since that time I have
hung out on my own hook. So come along, George; I really can't hear any
excuse."

George hesitated only a moment; he had never spent an evening from home
without first acquainting his mother; but this was an unusual event,
and he was so anxious to hear about Dr. Seaward, and talk over old
school days, the temptation was irresistible.

Harry Ashton called a cab, much to George's surprise, into which they
jumped; and were not very long in getting into the Clapham road, where
they alighted before a large, nice looking house.

"This is the crib," said Ashton, as he ushered George into a large
parlour, handsomely furnished with everything contributing to comfort
and amusement. "Now, make yourself at home. Here are some cigars
(producing a box of Havannahs), and here (opening a cellaret) is bottled
beer and wine; which shall it be?"

"As to smoking, that is a bad habit, or an art (which you like) I have
never yet practised," said George; "but I will join you in a glass of
wine just to toast 'Dr. Seaward and our absent friends in the school.'"

Then the two school friends fell into conversation. Many and many a
happy recollection came into their minds, and one long yarn was but the
preface to another.

"Come, George, fill up your glass," said Ashton repeatedly; but George
declined.

Two or three hours slipped rapidly away, and then George rose to leave.
"Not a bit of it, George," said Ashton; "we must have some supper and
discuss present times yet. I have not heard particulars of what you are
doing, or how you are getting on, and you only know I'm here, without
any of the history about it."

So George yielded: how could he help it? Harry Ashton had become his
bosom-chum during the five years he had been at school, and all the old
happy memories of those days were again fresh upon him.

"Now, George, tell your story first, and then mine shall follow." Then
George narrated all the leading circumstances which had attended his
life, from the time he left school up to that very evening, and a long
story it was.

"Now," said Ashton, "for mine. When you left Folkestone I got up to your
place at the head of the school, and there I held on till I left. Six
months after you left, the holidays came, and I came up to town. I spent
a few days with Mr. Ralston, an old friend of the family, and one of the
first engineers and surveyors in London. He took a liking to me, offered
to take me into his office, wrote to the governor (I know you don't like
that term, though--I mean my father), proposed a sum as premium,
arrangements were made; and, instead of returning to school, I came to
London and commenced learning the arts and mysteries of a profession. I
had only been with Mr. Ralston two or three months, when one morning my
father came into the office, out of wind with excitement, and said,
'Harry, I have got sad and joyful, and wonderful news for you! Poor old
Mr. Cornish is dead; the will has been opened, and--make up your mind
for a surprise--the bulk of his property is left to you.' I was
thunderstruck. I knew the old gentleman would leave me something, but I
did not know that he had quarrelled with his relatives, and therefore
appropriated to me the share originally intended for them. So, you see,
I have stepped into luck's way. I am allowed an income now which amounts
to something like two hundred a year, as I shall not come into my rights
till I am twenty-one, and how I am not nineteen; so I have a long time
to wait, you see, which is rather annoying. I took this crib, and have
managed to enjoy my existence pretty well, I can assure you. Sometimes I
run down into the country to spend a week or two with the old folks, and
sometimes they come up and see me."

"Don't you find it rather dull, living here alone, though?" said George.

"Dull? far from it. I have a good large circle of friends, who like to
come round here and spend a quiet evening; and there are no end of
amusements in this great city, so that no one need never be dull.
Besides, if I am alone, I am not without friends, you see,"--pointing to
a well-stocked book case.

"I have been running my eye over them, Harry. There are some very nice
books; but your tastes are changed since I knew you last, or you would
never waste your time over all this lot here which seem to have been
best used. I mean the 'Wandering Jew,' 'Ernest Maltravers,' and the
like."

"I won't attempt to defend myself, George; but when I was at school, I
did as school-boys did: now I have come to London, I do as the Londoners
do. I know there is an absence of anything like reason in this, but I am
not much thrown amongst reasoners. But, to change the subject; now you
have found me out, George, I do hope you will very often chum with me. I
shall enjoy going about with you better than with anybody else; and as
we know one another so well, we shall soon have tastes and habits in
common again, as we used to have."

Presently the clock struck. George started up in surprise. "What!
twelve o'clock! impossible. It never can be so late as that?"

"It is, though," said Ashton, "but what of that? you don't surely call
twelve o'clock bad hours for once in a way?"

"No, not for once in a way," replied George; "but I have never kept my
mother up so late before. Good-bye, old fellow. Promise to come and see
me some night this week. There is my address." And so saying, George ran
out into the street and made his way towards Islington.

That was an anxious night for Mrs. Weston. "What can have happened?" she
asked herself a hundred times. Fortunately, Mr. Brunton called, and he
assisted to while away the time.

"George does not often stay out of an evening, does he?" he asked.

"No, never," replied Mrs. Weston; "unless it is with his friend, Charles
Hardy, and then I always know where they are, and what they are doing.
But something extraordinary must have happened to-night, and I feel very
anxious to know what it is. Not that I think he is anywhere he ought not
to be. I feel sure he is not," continued Mrs. Weston confidently; "but
what it is that has detained him, I am altogether at a loss to guess."

"Well, I will not leave you till he comes home," said Mr. Brunton.

It was one o'clock before George arrived; it was too late to get an
omnibus, and a cab, he thought, was altogether out of the question;
therefore he had to walk the whole distance--or rather run, for he was
as anxious now to get home as they were to see him.

He was very much surprised, and, if it must be confessed, rather vexed
on some accounts, to find Mr. Brunton waiting up for him with his
mother.

His explanation of what had happened, told in his merry, ingenuous way,
at once dissipated any anxiety they had felt.

"I recollect Harry Ashton well," said Mrs. Weston. "Dr. Seaward pointed
him out to me, the first time I went to see you at Folkestone, as being
one of his best scholars; and he came home once with you in the holidays
to spend a day or two with us, did he not?"

"That is the same, mother, and a better-hearted fellow it would be hard
to find."

"There is only one disadvantage that I see in your having him as an
intimate friend," said Uncle Brunton, "and that is, he is now very
differently situated in position to you as regards wealth, and you
might find him a companion more liable to lead you into expense than any
of your other friends, because I know what a proud fellow you are,
George," he said, laughingly, "you like to do as your friends do, and
would not let them incur expense on your account unless you could return
their compliment. But I will not commence a moral discourse to-night--it
is time all good folks should be in bed."

All the next day George was thinking over the events of the previous
evening; he was pleased to have found out Harry Ashton, and thought he
would be just the young man he wanted for a companion. Then he compared
their different modes of life--Ashton living in luxuriant circumstances,
without anybody or anything to interfere with his enjoyment, and he,
obliged to live very humbly and carefully in order to make both ends
meet; and then came a new feeling, that of restraint.

"There is Ashton," he thought, "can go out when he likes and where he
likes, without its being necessary to say where he is going or what he
is going to do, and he can come in at night without being obliged to
account for all his actions like a child. If I happen to stay out, there
is Uncle Brunton and my mother in a great state of excitement about me,
which I don't think is right. I really do not wonder that the clerks
have made me a laughing-stock. All this while I have lived in London I
have seen nothing; have not been to any of the places of amusement; and
have not been a bit like the young men with whom I get thrown into
contact. I think Ashton is right, after all, in saying that when he was
at school he did as school-boys did, and when he came to London he did
as the Londoners do. Far be it from me to be undutiful to those who care
for me; but I think, as a young man, I do owe a duty to myself,
different altogether from that which belonged to me as a schoolboy."

These were all new thoughts to George: he had never felt or even thought
of restraint before; he had never even expressed a wish to do as other
young men did, in wasting precious time on useless amusements; he had
always looked forward to an evening at home with pleasure, and had never
felt the least inclination to wander forth in search of recreation
elsewhere. Nay, he had always condemned it; and when Lawson or Williams,
or any of the other clerks, had proposed such a thing to him, he never
minded bearing their ridicule in declining.

And here was George's danger. He was upon his guard with his
fellow-clerks, and was able to keep his resolution not to adopt their
ideas, nor fall into their ways and habits; but when those very evils he
condemned in them were presented to him in a different form by Harry
Ashton, his old friend and school-fellow--leaving the principle the
same, and only the practice a little altered--he was off his guard; and
the habits he regarded with dislike in Williams and Lawson, he was
beginning secretly to admire in Ashton.

As he walked home that evening with Hardy he gave him a long description
of his meeting with Ashton, and all that happened during his interview
and upon his return home.

"Now, Hardy," said George, "which do you think is really
preferable--Harry Ashton's life or ours? We never go out anywhere; and,
for the matter of that, might as well be living in monasteries, as far
as knowing what is going on in the world is concerned."

"For my own part, Weston," said Hardy, "I would rather be as I am. Your
friend is surrounded with infinitely greater temptations than we are,
from the fact of his living as he does without any control. He is
evidently free from his parents, and although he is old enough to take
care of himself, still there is a certain restraint felt under a
parent's roof which is very desirable."

"Quite true," said George; "but that involves a point which has been
perplexing me all day. Should we, after we have arrived at a certain
age, acknowledge a parent's control as we did when we were mere
school-boys? I do not mean are we to cease to honour them, because that
we cannot do while God's commandment lasts; but are we, as Williams
says, always to go in leading-strings, or are we at liberty to think and
act for ourselves?"

"That depends a good deal on the way in which we wish to think and act.
For instance, my parents object to Sunday travelling and Sunday
visiting. Now, while I am living with them, I feel it would not be right
for me to do either of these things--even though as a matter of
principle I might not see any positive wrong in them--because it would
bring me into opposition with my parents. So, in spending evenings away
from home, I know it would be contrary to their wish, and it is right to
try and prevent our opinions clashing."

"I agree with you, partly, Hardy; but only partly. We must study our
parents' opinions in the main, but not in points of detail. Suppose I
want to attend a course of lectures, for example, which would take me
from home sometimes in the evening; and my mother objects to my spending
evenings from home, although the study might be advantageous to me--then
I think I should be at liberty to adhere to my own opinion; if not, I
should be under the same restraint I was as a child. It is right and
natural that parents should feel desirous to know what associations
their sons are forming, and what are their habits, and all that sort of
thing; but I am inclined to think it is not right for a parent to
exercise so strong a control as to say, 'So-and-so shall be your
companion;' and, 'You may go to this place, but you may not go to
that.'"

"Well, Weston, your digestion must be out of order, or you are a little
bilious, or something; for I never heard you talk like this before. I
have told you, confidentially sometimes, that I have wanted to rebel
against the wishes of my parents on some points, and you have always
counselled me, like a sage, grey-headed father, to give up my desire.
But now you turn right round, and place me in the position of the
parent, and you the rebellious son. I recommend, therefore, that you
take two pills, for I am sure bile is at the bottom of this; and then I
will feel your pulse upon this point again."

Mrs. Weston noticed a difference in George that evening. He seemed as
if he had got something upon his mind which was perplexing him. He was
not so cheerful and merry as usual, but his mother attributed it partly
to his late hours, followed by a hard day's work, and therefore she said
nothing to him about it.

A day or two elapsed, and George was still brooding upon the same
subject. He did not know that the great tempter was weaving a subtle net
around him, to lure him into the broad road which leadeth to
destruction. He tried a hundred times to fight against the strange
influence he felt upon him; but he did not fight with the right weapons,
and therefore he failed. Had the tempter suggested to him that, as he
was a young man, he should do as his fellow-clerks, or even Ashton did,
and have his way in all things, he would have seen the temptation; but
it came altogether in a different way. The evil voice said, "You are
under restraint. Ask any young man of your own age, and he will tell you
so. It is high time you should unloose yourself from apron-strings." And
this idea of restraint was preying upon him, and he could not throw it
off. George was anxious to do the right, but did not know how to fight
against the wrong. Conscience whispered to him, "Do you remember that
motto your dying father gave you, 'For me to live is Christ?'" George
replied, "Yes, I remember it; and it is still my desire to follow it."
Conscience said again, "Do you recollect that sermon you heard, and the
resolutions you made, 'My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou
not?'" And he answered, "I remember it well; but I am not aware that any
are endeavouring to entice me."

This was the effect of the unconscious influence of Harry Ashton. He had
unknowingly fanned a latent spark into a flame, which, unless checked,
would consume all those high and praiseworthy resolutions which George
had formed, and carefully kept for years. He had cast a shadow over the
landscape of his friend's well-being, which made the sign-posts pointing
"upward and onward" almost indistinct. He had breathed into the
atmosphere a subtle malaria, and George had caught the disease. The
little leaven was now mixed with his life, which would leaven the whole.
The genus of that moral consumption, which, unless cured by the Great
Physician, ends in death, had been sown, and were now taking root.

George was unconscious of any foreign influence working upon him--he
could not see that Ashton had in any way exerted a power over him; nor
in the new and undefined feelings which had taken possession of him
could he recognise the presence of evil. He had consulted conscience,
and, he fancied, had satisfactorily met the warnings of its voice.

But he had _not_ gone to that high and sure source of strength which can
alone make a way of escape from all temptations; he had _not_ obtained
that armour of righteousness which is the only defence against the fiery
darts of the wicked one; he had _not_ that faith, in the power of which
alone Satan can be resisted; and therefore his eyes were holden so that
he could not see the snares which the subtle foe was laying around him,
nor could he, in his own strength, bear up against the strong tide which
was threatening to overwhelm him.




CHAPTER V.

A FARCE.


Harry Ashton kept his promise, and went one evening that week to see
George at Islington. Hardy had been invited to meet him; and the three
friends, as they kept up a perfect rattle of conversation, interspersed
with many crossfired jokes, made the merriest and happiest little party
that could be imagined.

Mrs. Weston was very much pleased with Ashton--his refined thought and
gentlemanly address, joined with an open-hearted candour and a fund of
humour which sparkled in every sentence, made it impossible for any one
not to like him. Charles Hardy thought he had never met a more
entertaining companion than Ashton; Ashton thought Hardy was an
intelligent, agreeable fellow; and George declared to his mother that,
if he had had the pick of all the young men in London, he could not have
found two nicer fellows.

A hundred topics were discoursed upon during the evening, in which
Ashton generally took the lead, and showed himself to be very well
informed on all ordinary subjects. Incidentally the theatre was
mentioned.

"Have you seen that new piece at the Lyceum?" said Ashton. "It is really
a very capital thing."

"No," said George. "I have never been to a theatre."

"Nor I," said Hardy.

"Nor I," said Mrs. Weston.

"Well, that is really very extraordinary," said Ashton; "I thought
almost everybody went to a theatre at some time or other. But perhaps
you have some objection?"

"I have," said Mrs. Weston. "I think there is a great deal of evil
learnt there, and very little good, if any. It is expensive; and it
leads into other bad habits."

"Those last objections cannot be gainsaid," said Ashton; "but they
equally apply to all amusements, and therefore, by that rule, all
amusements are bad."

"But not in an equal degree with that of the theatre," George remarked;
"because other amusements do not possess such an infatuation. For my
own part, I should not mind going to a concert; but I very much
disapprove of the theatre, and should never hesitate to decline going
there."

"Yours is not a good argument, George. You have never been to the
theatre, you say, and yet you disapprove of it. Are you right in
pronouncing such an opinion, which cannot be the result of your own
investigation?"

"I think I am," replied George; "I can adopt the opinions of those whom
experience has instructed in the matter, and in whom I can rely with
implicit confidence. If a man goes through a dangerous track, and falls
into a bog, I should be willing to admit the track was dangerous, and
avoid the bog, without going in to prove the former traveller was right;
and this applies to going to theatres."

"No, George; there is your error. There would be no two opinions about
the bog; but suppose you go for a tour to the Pyrenees, and, from
prejudice or some other cause, come back disgusted. You warn me not to
go, telling me I shall be wasting my time, and find nothing interesting
to reward my trouble in the journey. But Hardy goes the same tour, comes
home delighted, and says, 'Go to the Pyrenees by all means; it is a
glorious place, the most pleasant in the whole world for a tour.' To
decide the question, I read two books; one agrees with you, and the
other with Hardy. How can I arrive at an opinion unless I go myself, and
see what it is like? So it is with the theatre: some say it is the great
teacher of morals, others that it is the most wicked and hurtful place.
Therefore I think every one should form his own opinion from his own
experience."

"You may be right," said George, waveringly. "I am not clear upon the
subject; but I do not think, even if I were to form an opinion in the
way you prescribe, that I should ever choose the theatre as a place of
amusement."

"Then what is your favourite amusement?" asked Ashton.

"To come home and read, or spend a social evening with a friend," George
answered.

"Then I know what will suit you all to pieces," said Ashton; "and your
friend Hardy too. I am a member of a literary institution. It is a
first-rate place--the best in London. There are lectures and classes,
and soirees, a debating society, a good library, and rooms for
chess-playing and that sort of thing. Now, you really must join it; it
will be so very nice for us to have a regular place of meeting; and,
besides that, we can combine study with amusement. What do you say, Mrs.
Weston?"

"I cannot see any objection to literary institutions," said Mrs. Weston;
"but I have always considered them better suited to young men who are
away from home, than for those who have comfortable homes in which to
spend their evenings. You speak about having a regular place of meeting.
I shall always be very pleased to see you and Mr. Hardy here, as often
as ever you can manage to spend an evening with us."

"Many thanks for your kindness, Mrs. Weston," returned Ashton; "but it
would not be right for us to trespass on your good nature. Now I will
give you and your friend a challenge, George," he continued. "Next
Monday, the first debate of the season comes off; will you allow me to
introduce you to the institution on that evening?--it is a member's
privilege."

"I shall be very pleased to join you, then," said George. "What say you,
Hardy?"

"I accept the invitation, with thanks," replied Hardy.

On Monday night, as George and Hardy journeyed towards the place of
meeting, they discussed the question of joining the institution.

"If you will, I will," said Hardy. "My parents do not much like the
idea; but, as you said the other evening, 'we must not allow ourselves
to be controlled like mere children.'"

"I do think we really require a little recreation after business hours;
and we can obtain none better than that of an intellectual kind, such as
is found at literary institutions. The new term has only just commenced;
so we may as well be enrolled as members at once."

"I wish the institution was a little nearer home," said Hardy, "for it
will be so late of an evening for us to be out. However, we need not
always attend, nor is it necessary we should very often be late. Have
you had any difficulty in obtaining Mrs. Weston's consent to your
joining?"

"None at all; she prefers my attending an institution of this kind to
any other, although probably she would be better pleased if I did not
join one at all. But, as Ashton says, we really must live up to the
times, and know something of what is going on in the world around us.
Did you not notice, the other evening, how Ashton could speak upon every
subject brought on the carpet? My mother said, 'What a remarkably
agreeable young man he is! he has evidently seen a good deal of
society;' and I think the two things are inseparable--to be agreeable
in society, one must mix more with it."

Ashton was punctual to his appointment; and all were at the institution
just as the members were assembling for the debate. George was surprised
to find how many of the young men knew Ashton, and he admired the ease
and elegance of his friend in acknowledging the greetings which met him
on every hand.

"I won't bore you with introductions to-night," he said, "except to just
half-a-dozen fellows in particular, who, I am sure, you will like to
know; and we can all sit together and compare opinions during the
debate."

The friends were accordingly introduced; and as the proceedings of the
evening went on, and all waxed warm upon the subject under discussion,
the party which Ashton had drawn together soon became known to one
another, and were on terms of conversational acquaintance.

The meeting separated at ten o'clock, and then George and Hardy essayed
to bid good-night to their friends, and make their way at once towards
Islington.

"Nonsense," said Ashton; "I want you to come with me to a nice quiet
place I know, close by, and have a bit of supper and a chat over all
that has been said, and then I will walk part of the way home with you."

"No, not to-night, Ashton; it is quite late enough already; and it will
be past eleven o'clock before we get home as it is."

"What say you, Hardy? Can you persuade our sage old friend to abandon
his ten o'clock habits for one night?" asked Ashton.

"I do not like to establish a bad precedent," said Hardy; "and as we
have to-night joined the institution, I think we should make a rule to
start off home as soon as we leave the meetings, because we have some
distance to go, and bad hours, you know, interfere with business."

"I did not expect you to make a rule to keep bad hours," said Ashton;"
but every rule has an exception--"

"And therefore it will not do to commence with the exception; so
good-bye, till we meet again on Wednesday."

Three nights a-week there was something going on at the institution
sufficiently attractive to draw George and Hardy there. One evening a
lecture, another the discussion class, and the third an elocution class,
or more frequently that was resigned in favour of chess. From meeting
the same young men, night after night, a great number of new
acquaintanceships were formed, and George would never have spent an
evening at home, had he accepted the invitations which were frequently
being given him; but he had made a compact with himself, that he would
never be out more than three evenings a week, and would devote the
remainder to the society of his mother. A certain little voice did
sometimes say to him, "Is it quite right and kind of you, George, to
leave your mother so often? Do you not think it must be rather lonely
for her, sometimes, without you?" And George would answer to the voice,
"Mother would never wish to stand between me and my improvement.
Besides, she has many friends who visit her, and with whom she visits;
and few young men of my age give their mothers more than three evenings
of their society a week."

One evening, as George and Hardy were entering the institution, Harry
Ashton came up to them, and said,--

"I have just had some tickets sent me for the Adelphi. There is nothing
going on here worth staying for, so I shall go. Dixon will make one, and
you and Hardy must make up the quartette."

"Dixon going?" asked George; "why, I thought he was such a sedate
fellow, and never went to anything of the sort!"

"Neither does he, as a rule; but he has never been to the Adelphi, and
he wants to go. Will you accompany us?"

"No, thank you," said George; "I told you once I did not like theatres;
perhaps you recollect we discussed the point one evening?"

"We did, and you said you had never been to a theatre: you disapproved
of them, without ever having had an opportunity of judging whether they
were good or bad places. Now, take the opportunity."

"I am not anxious to form a judgment; and I so dislike all the
associations of a theatre that it would be no pleasure for me to go."

"Complimentary, certainly!" laughed Ashton. "But I will grant you this
much--there are bad associations connected with the theatres, and this
is the stronghold of objectors; but we are four staid sober fellows, we
shall go to our box without any bother, sit and see the play without
exchanging a word with anybody beyond our own party, and then leave as
soon as the performance is over. You had better say you will go, eh?"

"No, it would be very late before I got home," said George: "and I do
not like keeping my mother up, more particularly as I was so very late
the other evening. But what do you say, Hardy?"

"I don't know what to say," said Hardy. "I did once say to myself I
would never go to a theatre; but I am not sure that there is any moral
obligation why I should keep my word, when the compact rests only with
myself. I have not time to consult Paley, and so I put the question to
you--Can I go, seeing I have said to myself I will not?"

"Arrange it in this way," said Ashton; "both of you go, and when you get
there, if you decide you have done wrong, then leave at once; or if you
find that your consciences are in durance vile, and you have not
patience or sufficient interest to stay and see the play out, go, and I
will excuse you then with all my heart; but I won't excuse your not
going. Now is your time to decide; for here comes Dixon, true to his
appointment."

"I suppose you have got your party complete, Ashton?" he said; "and if
so, we had better start at once, or the play will have begun before we
get there."

George pondered no longer. "Suppose we try it, Hardy, on Ashton's
plan," said he; "I don't see any harm in that, do you?"

"No, I think that is the best way in which the case can be put," he
replied; "and I don't see that any harm can possibly come of it."

Away went the party, full of high spirits, bent upon amusement. But
George felt a certain uneasy something, which tried to make him feel
less pleased with himself than usual, and his laugh was at first forced
and unnatural; there was not the same joyousness there would have been
had he been starting on some recreation which he knew would be approved
by parent and friends, and his own conscience. Ashton noticed he did not
seem to be quite at ease; and therefore he brought all his humour into
play to provoke hilarity. By the time they arrived at the theatre, that
love of novelty and excitement which is so natural to young people
completely overcame all other feelings, and the sight of the crowds
flocking into all parts of the house was now an irresistible temptation
to follow in too.

They were shown into a very comfortable box, commanding a good view of
the whole of the theatre. The thrilling strains of music issuing from
the orchestra, the dazzling lights, and the large assembly of elegantly
dressed ladies in the boxes, a mass of people in the pit, and tiers of
heads in the galleries, filled George with excitement. He who a little
while before had been the dullest of the party, was now the gayest of
the gay; he was lost in astonishment at all he saw and heard, dazzled
with the brilliancy of the scene, and abandoned to all the enjoyments of
the hour.

The performances that evening consisted of a farce, the comedy of the
"Serious Family," and a ballet. When the curtain rose, and the farce
commenced, George entered heart and soul into the spirit of the
performance; laughed till the tears rolled down his cheeks at the
dilemmas of an unlucky wight who acted a prominent part, and stamped
applause in favour of a young lady who tried in every way to defend this
unfortunate individual from his persecutors.

When it was over, Ashton turned to George, and said--

"Well, Weston, so much for the farce; now, if you think it is
objectionable, off you go, old fellow, and we will forgive you."

"No," said George; "I think that farce was capital, and I shall stay now
and see the end. I am not surprised people like the theatre--I never
enjoyed a laugh more in my life. But there is one thing I have not
liked. That hero of the piece did not scruple to use language for which
he would have been kicked out of any respectable private house--and yet
there are respectable people here, old and young, all listening and
seeming to enjoy it. That shows there is insincerity somewhere; either
these people hush their sensitive feelings in the playhouse, or they are
hypocrites at home, and profess to be much more refined than they really
are."

"You evidently don't understand plays yet," said Ashton; "that man
depicts a certain style of life, and he must be true to it. If he enacts
the part of a costermonger, he must swear and talk slang, and commit
crimes, if need be, or anything suiting the character he assumes; or
else the thing would be absurd, and the gentleman and costermonger would
be both alike."

"The theatre must be a 'great teacher of morals,' then, if we come here
to be initiated into the vices of costermongers," said George, rather
sarcastically.

"George," whispered Hardy, "we've got into a mess; look down in the
pit--Williams and Lawson are there. They have recognized us, and are
nodding--shall we nod?"

"Yes," said George, and he nodded; but his face was red as crimson. "I
would not have had Lawson and Williams see us here for the world," he
whispered to Hardy; "but it's too late now--as you say, we've got into a
mess."

Just then the curtain rose again, and the play of the "Serious Family,"
commenced.

The plot of the piece is this:--

Mr. Abinadab Sleek and Lady Creamly are two hypocrites, introduced as
ordinary specimens of Christians. They are living in the house of their
daughter and son-in-law (Mr. and Mrs. Charles Torrens), over whom they
exercise a stern and despotic control. Mr. Charles Torrens, "for the
sake of peace and quietness," agrees to all the solemnities opposed upon
him; and is willing to pass himself off in Christian circles as a
co-worker with Mr. Abinadab Sleek. In his heart he detests everything
like seriousness; and whenever an opportunity occurs, on the pretext of
going into the country, indulges in the gaieties and vices of London
fashionable life. He is visited by an old friend, Captain Murphy
Maguire, who persuades him to renounce boldly the sanctimonious customs
of the "Serious Family," and enjoy with unshackled freedom the pleasures
of the world. To this he consents; but he has not courage to alter the
family customs. Captain Maguire aids his plans by convincing Mrs. C.
Torrens that unless she provides in her home those amusements which are
found in the world, her husband will prefer the world to his home. A
conspiracy is laid to oppose the religious tyranny of Mr. Abinadab
Sleek, the result of which is, that a ball is given by Mr. Torrens,
assisted by his wife, who, throwing off her former profession of
Christianity, becomes a woman of the world. On all this their future
happiness as man and wife is made to hinge; and when, through the flimsy
plot of the piece, the tableau arrives, the curtain drops, leaving the
younger members of the "Serious Family" whirling in the giddy dance,
commencing the new era of domestic happiness.

Throughout the play, Scripture is quoted and ridiculed, religion is made
contemptible, and vice under the name of "geniality, openheartedness,
and merriment," is made to appear the one thing necessary to constitute
real happiness.

George followed the play through all its shifting scenes; now laughed,
now sighed, now felt the hot blush of shame as he listened to the
atrocious mockery of everything which, from the time he had been an
infant on his mother's knee, he had been taught to regard as good and
pure. He was heated to indignation when the audience applauded the base
character of Maguire, and shuddered when as he thought that a masked
hypocrite was brought before the world as the type of a Christian, and
that a "Serious Family" was only another name for an unhappy, canting
set of ignorant people.

And yet George did not leave the theatre. He was hurt, wounded to the
heart by what he saw and heard, felt he would have given the world to
have stood up in the box, and have told the audience that the play was a
libel upon everything sacred and solemn; but he stayed and saw it out,
rivetted by that strange, unholy infatuation which has been the bane of
so many.

"Let us go now, Hardy," he said, as the curtain dropped; "you do not
care to see the ballet, do you?"

"Oh, in for a penny, in for a pound. While we are here, we may as well
see all that is to be seen. I won't ask you how you liked the comedy. I
want to see something lively now, to remove the disagreeable impressions
it has left upon me."

And so they stayed, delighted with the music, fascinated with the
graceful dancing, and dazzled with the scenery. At length the curtain
fell, and the evening's performance was over.

"It is only half-past eleven," said Ashton, when they got outside; "now
we must just turn in somewhere, and get a bit of supper, and then, I
suppose we must separate. There is a first-rate hotel close handy, where
I sometimes dine. What do you say?"

"Just the place for us," said Dixon; "because we must limit ourselves to
half an hour, and we shall get what we want quickly there."

As they went into the supper-room, George saw, to his vexation, Lawson
and Williams, with a party of boon companions, seated round a table at
the further end. He instantly drew back; but it was too late, they had
recognised him.

"Confound it!" he said to Ashton, "there are some chaps from our office,
at the end there. I do not wish to meet them; cannot we go into a
private room?"

"Certainly," said Ashton; and the party retreated. "But why do you not
wish to meet your fellow clerks?"

"Because they are a low set of fellows with whom I have nothing in
common."

When supper was over and the clock had struck twelve, the party
separated.

"Good night, old fellow," said Ashton to George. "I am sorry we have
not seen quite the sort of play you would have liked; but now you have
seen the worst side of the theatre, and next time we go together we will
try and see the best; so that between the two extremes you will be able
to discriminate and determine what sort of place the theatre is as an
amusement."

"Thank you, Ashton, for your share in the entertainment to-night. I will
talk to you about the play some other time; but I must say, candidly, I
never felt so distressed in my life as I did while that gross insult to
all good feeling, 'The Serious Family,' was being performed. If you had
said to me what that wretch, Captain Maguire, said in my hearing
to-night, I would not have shaken hands with you again as I do now."

An omnibus happened to be passing for the Angel at Islington that
moment, and George and Hardy got up.

"What shall we do with regard to Williams and Lawson?" said Hardy. "They
have got a victory to-night. I fear our protest against theatres and
taverns is over with them for ever now, seeing they have caught us at
both places."

"I cannot but regret the circumstance," said George, "but it is nothing
to them; they are not our father-confessors, and we are not bound to
enter into any particulars with them. The greatest difficulty with me is
how to manage when I get home. I don't like deceiving my mother; but I
should not like to pain her by saying I have been to the theatre. She
knew I started for the institution, and that I might possibly be late;
so, unless she asks me where I have been, I don't see that there will be
any good in unnecessarily distressing her."

"The disagreeable thing in such a case is," replied Hardy, "if the fact
comes out afterwards, it _looks_ as if a deception had been practised."

George and Hardy had never talked together like this before; and they
spoke hesitatingly, as if they hardly liked to hear their own voices
joining to discuss a mean, unworthy, dishonourable trick.

O temptation! what an inclined path is thine! How slippery for the feet,
and how rapidly the unwary traveller slides along, lower and lower--each
step making the attempt to ascend again to high ground more difficult!
George had made many dangerous slips that night--would he ever regain
his position?

Mrs. Weston was sitting up for George, and pleased was she to hear, at
last, his knock at the door.

"Mother, this is too bad of me, keeping you up so late," said George. "I
really did not mean to keep bad hours to-night; but I will turn over a
new leaf for the future."

"I do not mind sitting up, George, if it is for your good," she
answered; "but I fear you will not improve your health by being so late
as this. Have you enjoyed your meeting to-night?"

"Pretty well," said George; "but I have been with Ashton, Dixon, and
Hardy since."

"Then you have not had supper?"

"Yes, we had supper with Ashton." George got red as he said this. It was
the first time he ever remembered wilfully deceiving his mother.

"Oh! that has made you late, then," said Mrs. Weston. "I am afraid
Ashton has so many attractions in those apartments of his--what with
friends, books, and curiosities--that you find it difficult to break up
your social gatherings."

"It is too bad of me to leave you so often, my dear mother; but I don't
mean to go to Ashton's again for some time, unless he comes to see us;
and so I shall return straight home from the institution for a long
while."

When George retired to his room, he felt so distracted with all that
had taken place, that his old custom of reading a chapter from God's
Word, and kneeling down to pray before getting into bed, was abandoned
for that night. He tried to sleep, but could not. The strains of music
were yet ringing in his ears, and the dazzling light was still flashing
before his eyes. Then the plays came again before him; and he followed
the plots throughout, smiling again over some of the jokes, and feeling
depressed at the sad parts. Then he thought of Williams and Lawson, and
reproached himself for having acted that evening very, very foolishly.
Alas! this was not the right term; it was more than foolishness to
tamper with the voice of conscience, to violate principles which had
been inculcated from childhood, to plot wilful deceit, and act a lie.
Instead of saying he had acted foolishly, he should have said, "Father,
I have sinned against heaven and in thy sight Have mercy upon me, O God!
Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquities, and cleanse me from my sin; for
against Thee, Thee only have I sinned, and done this evil." But George
only said, "I am so very vexed I went with Ashton to-night; it was very
foolish!--very foolish!"




CHAPTER VI.

THE LECTURE.


"You look seedy this morning, Mr. Weston," said Williams, as George
entered the office on the following day. "The effect of last night's
dissipation, I suppose. How did you like the play?"

"Not at all," answered George, mortified and angry at having the
question put to him before all the clerks, who were now informed of the
fact of his having been there.

"No; I suppose one Abinadab Sleek does not like to hear another one of
the same gang spoken ill of, eh?"

"I do not understand you," said George.

"Then, to put it plainer, you and Hardy, who are of the 'Serious Family'
style, don't like to see yourselves taken off quite so true to life as
you were last night at the Adelphi. You saw that old canting Abinadab
Sleek was up to every dodge and vice, although he did seem such a
sanctified individual in public; and our young Solomons, who condemn
wicked theatres and disgusting taverns, can go to both on the sly, and
be as sanctimonious as ever Abinadab was in office."

George felt his hands clench, and his eyes flash fire. He could bear
taunts from Williams, when he had right on his side, and felt the
consciousness of innocence; but he could not bear it now.

"You lie," said George passionately, "in drawing that comparison."

"And you lie continually," said Williams, "in acting a perpetual edition
of that part of the 'Serious Family' represented by Abinadab Sleek."

"Fight it out I fight it out!" said Lawson. "The Governor won't be here
for half an hour; bolt the door and have it out."

"Nothing of the kind," said Hardy, stepping forward. "Williams is the
aggressor in this instance; it is nothing to him if Weston and I went to
the theatre every night in our lives; he has no right to interfere; if
he fights it must be with Weston and me, for he insults me as much as my
friend."

"Then come on," said Williams, taking off his coat, "and I'll take you
both: one man is worth two canting hypocrites, any day."

But no one had bolted the door, and, to the surprise of all, Mr.
Compton stood before them.

"What is this?" he said; "young men in my office talking of fighting, as
if it were the tap-room of a public house? George Weston! I did not
think this of you."

"Do not judge hastily, sir," said Hardy. "My friend Weston has been
grossly insulted by Mr. Williams, and the little disturbance has only
been got up through jealousy, to get him into trouble."

"Step into my room a moment, Mr. Hardy," said Mr. Compton; "and you,
too, Weston and Williams."

George was flushed with excitement; but his proud, manly bearing, in
contrast to the crest-fallen Williams, won for him the admiration of the
whole staff of clerks.

Mr. Compton patiently heard from Hardy a recital of the causes leading
to the fray, and was made acquainted with the course of opposition
George had to contend with, from Williams and Lawson, ever since he had
been in the office.

"I regret this circumstance," said Mr. Compton, "for several reasons. I
have always held you, Weston, in the highest estimation, nor do I see
sufficient cause, from this event, to alter my estimate; but I have
always found my best clerks those who have been in the habit of spending
their evenings elsewhere than in theatres and taverns. I am not
surprised at the part you have taken, Mr. Williams; and it now rests
with you, whether you remain in this office or leave. I will not have
the junior clerks in this establishment held in subjection to those who
have been with me a few years longer; nor will I have a system of insult
and opposition continued, which must eventually lead to unpleasant
results. If I hear any more of this matter, or find that you persist in
your unwarranted insults on Mr. Weston, I shall at once dismiss you from
my service. You did well, Mr. Hardy, in interfering to prevent a
disgraceful fight; and, much as I dislike tale-bearing, I request you to
inform me, for the future, of any unpleasantness arising to Mr. Weston
from this affair."

Williams was terribly crest-fallen, and the tide of office opinion
turned from him in favour of George and Hardy, who, without crowing over
the victory they had gained, yet showed a manly determination not to
allow an insult which reflected upon their characters.

"I tell you what it is," whispered Lawson to Williams; "Old Compton
takes a fancy to those two sneaking fellows, and, after this affair,
the office will get too hot for us if we do not draw it milder to them.
If I were you, I should waylay them outside the office and say something
civil, by way of soft soap, so as to nip this matter off, for you've got
the worst of it so far."

Williams determined to accept the hint Lawson had given him, and when
the office closed, remained in the court until George came out.

"Mr. Weston," he said, stretching out his hand, which George felt would
be mean-spirited not to take, "that was an unpleasant affair this
morning, but I didn't think you would fire up as you did; and when I let
fly at you, it was only in joke."

"I must deny that it was a joke," George replied; "it was an intended
insult. Probably you might not have thought it would have produced
indignation in me, because you, evidently, do not understand my feelings
in the matter. However, let the thing drop now. I will not retract what
I said to you this morning, that you lied in forming that estimate of my
character, nor do I ask you to retract your words, unless your
conscience tells you that you wronged me."

"What I said was hasty, and I don't mind eating all my words," said
Williams; "so, as the song says, 'Come, let us be happy together.' Will
you come into the King's Head, and take a glass of wine on the strength
of it?"

"No, thank you," said George; "but as it is no wish of mine to live at
loggerheads with any one, here is my hand upon it."

And then they shook hands, and so the matter ended. But it ended only so
far as Williams was concerned. A day or two afterwards Mr. Brunton was
passing the office, and he called in to say "How d'ye do?" to Mr.
Compton. In the course of conversation he asked how George was getting
on, and whether he continued to give satisfaction.

"Yes," said Mr. Compton, "I have no fault to find with him; on the
contrary, he is the best junior clerk I ever had, and I trust him with
matters I never placed in the hands of a junior clerk before. But there
was an unfortunate occurrence the other day, which I think it right to
mention to you confidentially." And then Mr. Brunton heard the whole
history of the theatre adventure, and its consequences in the office on
the following morning. He was grieved, deeply grieved. At first he could
not credit the account; but when he heard that George had himself
confessed to the truth of the circumstances before Mr. Compton, and
there was no longer room to doubt, a tear stood in his eye as he thought
of his nephew--that noble, manly boy, whom he loved with all the
affection of a father--stooping to temptation, and acting the part of a
deceiver; for Mr. Brunton had spent an evening with Mrs. Weston and
George, and had heard nothing of his having been to a theatre, nor did
he believe Mrs. Weston was aware of it.

"What I have told you is strictly confidential," said Mr. Compton; "but
as you are, as it were, the father of George Weston, I thought it only
right that you should know this, in order that you may warn him, if he
has got into the hands of bad companions."

George was absent from the office during the interview, and did not know
until some days afterwards of his uncle's visit.

Mr. Brunton went from Falcon-court a sadder man. He was perplexed and
harassed; he could not conscientiously tell Mrs. Weston, as he had
received the information in confidence; he could not speak directly to
George upon the subject, because he would at once have known that Mr.
Compton must have given the statement to his uncle. He was obliged,
therefore, to remain passive in the matter for a day or two, and
resolved to spend an evening that week at Islington.

In the meantime the affair became known to Mrs. Weston, and in rather a
curious manner. George had worn his best coat on the evening he went to
the theatre; and one day as Mrs. Weston, according to custom, was
brushing it, before putting it away in his drawers, she turned out the
pockets, and, amongst other things, drew forth a well-used play-bill.

"George has never been to the theatre, surely?" she asked herself.
"Impossible! he would have told me had he done so, for he is far too
high-principled to deceive me."

But the sight of that play-bill worried Mrs. Weston. She thought over it
all day, and longed for the evening to come, when she might ask George
about it.

That evening Mr. Brunton had determined to spend at Islington; and as he
was passing Falcon-court, he called for George on his way, and they
walked home together.

The play-bill happened to be on the table when they entered, and it
caught the eye of both George and Mr. Brunton at once.

"Where did you get that from?" asked George, colouring, not with the
honest flush of self-respect, but with the burning sense of deceit
detected.

"I found it in your pocket, George; and as I have never found one there
before, I thought I would leave it out, to ask you how you came by it."

"I came by it the other night, when I went to the theatre," said George;
for he could not tell a direct falsehood. "I did not tell you of it at
the time, but led you to suppose that I had been at the institution."

Mrs. Weston was indeed sorry to hear George's account of what had
passed; but Mr. Brunton felt all his old confidence in George restored
by the open, genuine statement he made.

"George," said Mr. Brunton, "I know you are old enough to manage your
affairs for yourself, without an uncle's interference, but do take from
me one word of caution. I fear you may be led unwittingly into error by
your associates. Do be on your guard--'if sinners entice thee, consent
thou not.' If you feel it right, and can conscientiously go with them
and adopt their habits, I have no right, nor should I wish to advise
you; but if you feel that you are wrong in what you do, listen to the
voice of your better self, and pause to consider. Do not turn a deaf
ear to its entreaties, but be admonished by its counsel, and rather
sacrifice friends and pleasure than that best of all enjoyments--the
satisfaction of acting a part of duty to God and yourself."

George did not argue the point with his uncle; he felt himself in the
wrong, but could not see his way clear to get right again.

"I have made so many resolves in my short life," he said, "and have
broken them so often, that I will not pledge myself to making fresh ones
My error, in this instance, has not been the fault of my companionships,
but entirely my own; and, as far as I can see, the chief blame lies in
having concealed the matter from my mother, which I did principally out
of kindness to her. But I will endeavour to take your counsel, uncle."

Weeks passed away, and with them the vivid memories of that time. George
had at length reasoned himself into the idea that a great deal of
unnecessary fuss had been made about nothing, and instead of weaning
himself from the society of Ashton, they became more than ever thrown
into each other's company. George was a constant attendant at the
institution, where he was surrounded by a large circle of intimate
acquaintances, with whom much of his time was spent. In the office he
had risen in the estimation of the clerks. Williams and Lawson, finding
that opposition was unavailing, altered their conduct towards him, and
became as civil and obliging as they had before been insulting and
disagreeable. George began to think he had belied their characters from
not having known sufficient of them; and instead of shunning them, as he
had hitherto done, sometimes took a stroll with them in the evening
after office hours, and once or twice had dined with them at the King's
Head.

Imperceptibly, George began to alter. Sooner or later, evil
communications must corrupt good manners; and from continually beholding
the lives of his companions, without possessing that one thing needful
to have kept him free from the entanglement of their devices, he became
changed into the same image, by the dangerous power of their influence
and example.

A month or two after the theatre adventure, Mrs. Weston received an
invitation to spend a week or two in the country with some relatives,
whom she had not seen for several years. Mr. Brunton persuaded her to
accept it, as the change would be beneficial; and George, knowing how
seldom his mother had an opportunity for recreation, added all his
powers of argument to induce her to go. The only obstacle presenting
itself was the management of the house during her absence. Mr. Brunton
invited George to stay with him while Mrs. Weston would be away; and she
did not like to leave her servant alone in the house with the boarders.
It was at last arranged that George should decline Mr. Brunton's
invitation, and have the oversight of the house during his mother's
absence.

The first night after her departure, George brought Hardy home with him
to spend the evening, and a pleasant, quiet time they had together.

"It will be rather dull for you, George," said Hardy, "if Mrs. Weston is
going to remain away for a few weeks. What shall you do on Sunday? You
had better come and spend the day with us."

"No, I cannot do that, because I promised I would be here, to let the
servant have an opportunity of going to church. But I mean to ask Ashton
to come and spend the day here, and you will come too; and there's
Dixon, he is a nice fellow, I'll ask him to come as well."

"What is to be the programme for the day?" said Hardy. "Of course it
will be a quiet one."

"We will all go to church or chapel in the morning, spend the afternoon
together at home, and take a stroll in the evening after the service.
Are you agreed?"

"I think we shall have a very nice day of it. Let the other chaps know
of it early, and we will meet here in good time in the morning."

Sunday came, and George's friends arrived as he expected. They were
early, and had time for a chat before starting out.

"Where shall we go this morning?" asked George. "There is a very good
minister close by at the church, and another equally good at the chapel.
My principles are unsectarian, and I do not mind where it is we go."

"Don't you think," said Dixon, "we might do ourselves more good by
taking a stroll a few miles out of town, and talking out a sermon for
ourselves?"

"I am inclined to the belief that nature is the best preacher," Ashton
remarked. "We hear good sermons from the pulpit, it is true; but words
are poor things to teach us of the Creator, in comparison with
creation."

"I do not agree with you in your religious sentiments, Ashton, as you
know," said George. "Creation tells us nothing about our Saviour, and,
as I read the Scriptures, no man can know God, the Father and Great
Creator, but through Him."

"And yet, if I remember rightly, the Saviour said that He made the
world, and without Him was not anything made that was made--so that He
was the Creator; and when we look from nature up to nature's God we see
Him, and connecting His history with the world around us, we have in
creation, as I said before, the best sermon; aye, and what the parsons
call a 'gospel' sermon, too."

"I agree with you," said Dixon; "preaching is all very well in its way,
and I like a good sermon; but the words of man can never excel the works
of God."

"A proper sermon," replied George, "is not uttered in the words of man;
they are God's words applied and expounded. Nature may speak to the
senses, but the Scriptures alone speak to the heart; and that is the
object of preaching. But you are my visitors, and you shall decide the
point."

"Then I say a stroll," said Ashton.

"And so do I," chimed in Dixon.

"I am for going to a place of worship," said Hardy.

"And so am I," Ashton replied; "is not all God's universe a place of
worship?"

"Perhaps so," answered Hardy; "but I mean the appointed and proper
place, where those who try to keep holy the Sabbath day are accustomed
to meet--a church or chapel."

"I side with Hardy," said George. "But I am willing to meet you halfway.
If I go with you this morning, you must all promise to go with me in the
evening. But bear in mind I am making a concession, and I go for a
stroll under protest, because it is contrary to my custom."

"All right, old chap," said Ashton. "I never knew anybody's conscience
fit them so uneasily as yours does. But it always did; at school, you
were a martyr to it, and I believe the blame lies at the door of dear
old Dr. Seaward, who persisted in training us up in the way we should
go, just as if we were all designed to be parsons."

"Poor old Dr. Seaward!" said George. "If he only knew two of his old
scholars were going out for a stroll on Sunday morning to hear nature
preach, I believe his body would hardly contain his troubled spirit."

"And he would appear before us to stop us on our way--"

"Like the spirit before Balaam and his ass, seems the most appropriate
simile," said Dixon, "for, if I recollect rightly, Balaam was going
where he should not have gone, and his conscience gave him as much
trouble as Weston's does."

George did not think and say, as Balaam did, "I have sinned;" but he
felt the sting of ridicule, and determined he would allow no
conscientious scruple to bring it upon him again during that day.

"After all," he argued with himself, "what is the use of my being
conscientious, for I am so wretchedly inconsistent? I had better go all
one way, or all the other, instead of wavering between the two, and
perpetually showing my weakness."

It would have puzzled any one to have told what sermon nature preached
to that merry party, as they wandered through green fields and quiet
lanes, talking upon a hundred different subjects, and making the calm
Sabbath morn ring with the strains of their laughter.

"Your idea of creation's voice is better in theory than in practice,"
George said, when they returned home. "Can any of you tell me what the
text was which nature took to preach from, for I have no distinct
remembrance of it?"

"The text seemed to me to be this," said Dixon, "that 'to everything
there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heavens--a time
to weep and a time to laugh--a time to keep silence and a time to
speak;' and the application was, that we had chosen the right time for
enjoying much speaking and much laughing."

The afternoon was not spent as George had been accustomed to spend it.
Light, frivolous conversation, and still more dangerous debate upon
religious subjects, without religious feeling, occupied the time, and
George felt glad when the evening came, and they started off together to
hear a popular preacher, whose merits they had been discussing during
the afternoon.

On their way thither they passed a large building, into which several
people were entering, and as the outside of the place was ornamented
with handbills, they paused to read them. They ran thus:--

    "HALL OF SCIENCE.--A Lecture will be delivered in this Hall on
    Sunday evening, at half past six, by Professor Martin, on 'The Uses
    of Reason.' Young men are cordially invited to attend.

    "What is truth? Search and see."

"Do you know anything of this Professor Martin?" asked Dixon. "Is he
worth hearing?"

"A friend of mine told me he had heard him, a little while ago, and was
never better pleased with any lecture," Ashton answered. "Shall we put
up here for the evening?"

"Is he a preacher, or a mere lecturer?" asked George. The question
attracted the attention of a person entering the Hall; and, turning to
George, he answered:--

"Professor Martin is one of those best of all preachers. He can interest
without sending you to sleep, and his discourses are full of sound
wisdom. He is a lover of truth, and advocates the only way to arrive at
it, which is by unfettered thought. In his lectures he puts his theory
into practice by freely expressing his unfettered thoughts. I have seats
in the front of the lecture-room; if you will favour me by accepting
them, they are at your service."

The plausible and polite manner of the stranger was effectual with
George.

"I don't think we can do better than go in and hear what the lecturer
has to say," he said to the others. And, assent being given, they
followed the stranger, and were conducted to the proffered seats.

The audience consisted principally of men, the majority of whom were
young and of an inferior class, such as shopmen and mechanics. There was
a large platform, with chairs upon it, but no pulpit or reading-desk.
When the lecturer, accompanied by a chairman and some friends, entered,
George and his companions were surprised to hear a clapping of hands and
stamping of feet, similar to the plan adopted at public amusements.

"This does not seem much like a Sunday evening service," said George.
"We have time to leave, if you like; or shall we stay and see it out?"

"Oh! let us stay," replied the others.

No hymn was sung, no prayer was offered at the commencement, but the
lecturer, with a pocket Bible in his hands, quoted a few passages of
Scripture, as follows:--

"Come now, and let us reason together,"--Isa. i. 18; "I applied mine
heart to know, and to search, and to seek out wisdom, and to know the
reason of things,"--Eccles. vii. 25; "And Paul, as his manner was, went
in unto them, and three Sabbath days reasoned with them out of the
Scriptures,"--Acts xvii. 2; "Be ready alway to give an answer to every
man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you,"--1 Peter iii.
15.

The object of the lecturer was to show that no intelligent being could
receive truth unless that truth commended itself to reason, because the
two were never in opposition one with the other. Conscience, he said,
was the soul's safeguard, and reason the safeguard of the heart and
intellect. It was irrational to condemn any course of conduct which
conscience approved, and it was equally irrational to believe anything
that could not be understood. The Word of God might be useful in its
way, but only as studied with unfettered thought. If that Word exalted
reason and then taught inconsistencies and absurdities, reason must
discriminate between the right and the wrong. "For example," he
continued, "if that book tells me that there are three Gods, and yet
those three are one, I reason by analogy and say, here are three
fingers; each one has its particular office; but I cannot make these
three fingers one finger, neither can I make three Gods one God."

So the lecturer continued, but he did not put his case in so many plain
words as these; every argument he clothed with doubtful words, so as to
make falsehood look like truth, and blasphemy like worship. He was an
educated and intelligent man, gifted with that dangerous power of
preaching the doctrine of devils in the guise of an angel of light, and
handling deadly sophistry with as firm a grasp as if it were the sword
of the Spirit.

At the conclusion of the lecture he announced his intention to speak
from that platform again on the following Sunday, and invited all who
were inquiring the way of truth to be present, and judge what he said,
"whether it be right, or whether it be wrong."

As George and his friends were leaving the hall, the stranger, who had
accosted them before, came up, and bowing politely said--

"Will you allow me to offer you the same seats, for next Sunday evening?
If you will say yes, I will reserve them for you; otherwise you may have
difficulty in obtaining admission, for the room will, in all
probability, be more crowded than to-night, as Professor Martin was not
announced to lecture until late in the week, and the friends who
frequent the Hall had no notice of his being here."

"I will certainly come," said Ashton. "I never heard a speaker I liked
better. What say you?" he asked, turning to the others.

"I am anxious to hear the conclusion of the argument," said George; "so
we will accept your invitation," he added to the stranger, "and thank
you for your kindness and courtesy."

It was a long conversation the friends had as they strolled along that
evening. To George every argument the lecturer had brought forward was
new; and bearing, as they did, the apparent stamp of truth, he was
utterly confounded. Although he was a good biblical scholar, as regarded
the historical and narrative parts of the Scriptures, he was but ill
informed on those more subtle points which the lecturer handled. He had
never heard the doctrine of the Trinity, for example, disputed, and had
always implicitly believed it; now, when the lecturer quoted Scripture
to prove that truth was to be analysed by reason, and reason rejected
the idea of a Trinity, he was as unable to reconcile the two as if he
had never received any religious instruction at all.

"If what he advances be true," said George, "how irrational many things
in the Christian religion are! And how singular that men like him, who
'search into the reason of things' for wisdom, and hold opinions
contrary to the orthodox notions of those whom we call Christians,
should be looked upon with suspicion and distrust."

"No," replied Ashton; "he met that idea by saying that it was not more
than singular, in the early stages of science, for people to be burnt as
witches and magicians, because they made discoveries which are now
developed and brought into daily use, than it is now for men to be
scouted as infidel and profane, because they teach opinions which only
require investigation to make them universally admitted."

An unhappy day was that Sunday for George Weston. He had violated
principle, made concessions against the dictates of conscience (how poor
a safeguard for him!) and had learnt lessons which taught him to despise
those instructions which had hitherto been as a lamp unto his feet and a
light unto his path.

"Blessed is the man that _walketh_ not in the counsel of the ungodly,
nor _standeth_ in the way of sinners, nor _sitteth_ in the seat of the
scornful." George little thought how rapidly he was passing through
those different stages on the downward road. Had he never listened to
the council of the ungodly, he would not have walked in the way of evil,
but would have avoided even its very appearance; he would not have stood
in the way of sinners, parleying with temptations, as he had done on so
many occasions; nor would he have occupied that most dangerous of all
positions, the fatal ease of sitting in the seat of the scornful.




CHAPTER VII.

GETTING ON IN THE WORLD.


"Mr. Compton wishes to speak with you, Weston," said Mr. Sanders, the
manager, to George one morning, during the visit of Mrs. Weston in the
country.

"Good morning, Weston," said Mr. Compton; "I want to have a few minutes'
conversation with you: sit down. You have been in my office now more
than a twelvemonth, and I promised that you should have an increased
salary at the expiration of that time. Your services have been very
valuable to me during the past year, and I am in every way satisfied
with you. As a tangible proof of this, I beg your acceptance of this
little present," (handing him a ten-pound note,) "and during this year
on which you have entered, I shall have much pleasure in giving you a
salary of two guineas a week."

"I am exceedingly obliged to you sir," George stammered out, for he was
flabbergasted at the kindness of his employer; "I hope I may always
continue to do my duty in your office, and deserve your approbation."

"I hope so, too;" said Mr. Compton, "both for your sake and for my own.
If you continue as you have begun, there is a fair field before you, and
I will advance you as opportunity occurs. Now, apart from business, I
want one word with you. I kept you purposely last year upon a low
salary, because I have found that sometimes it is beneficial to young
men to have only a small income. With your increased salary, you will
have increased means for entering that style of life which is,
unfortunately, too universal with young men--I mean the gaieties and
dissipations of a London life are now more open to you than they were
before. But what is termed a 'fast' young man never makes a good clerk,
and I do hope you will not allow yourself to fail into habits which will
be obstacles to your future promotion."

"I will endeavour, sir, always to maintain my position in your office,"
said George; "and I feel very grateful to you for the interest you take
in my personal welfare."

George was in high spirits with his good fortune. He had not expected
more than a guinea, or at the utmost thirty shillings a week increase
for his second year, and had never dreamt of receiving so handsome a
present as L10. By that night's post he sent off a long letter to his
mother, giving her an account of the interview, and of his future
prospects.

But George had different ideas about his future now, to those he
cherished a twelvemonth back. Then he thought only of himself and his
mother; how happy they would be together, and how much he would
endeavour to contribute to her enjoyment. Now he congratulated himself
that he would be upon a footing with his friends, that he could do as
they did, and that he had the means to follow up those recreations which
were becoming habitual to him. For since Mrs. Weston had been away,
George had gone step by step further on unhallowed ground. Even Ashton
said, "Weston, you are coming it pretty strong, old fellow!" and Hardy
had declared that he could not keep pace with him. Night after night, as
he had no one at home to claim his presence there, he had been to
theatres and other places of amusement. Sunday after Sunday he had
attended the lectures at the Hall of Science, and abandoning himself to
the tide which was hurrying him along, he floated down the dangerous
stream.

The principles of infidelity which had been inculcated, appealed to him
with a voice so loud as to drown the appeals from a higher source. The
one approved his conduct, the other condemned it--the one pointed to the
world as a scene of enjoyment, the other as at enmity with God. George
felt that if he would hold one he must resign the other. He had not that
moral courage, or rather he had not the deep-rooted conviction of sin,
or the earnest love and fear of God, to enable him to burst through the
entanglements of the world and the world's god, and choosing whom he
would serve: he loved darkness rather than light.

When Mrs. Weston returned, after a month's absence, she could not but
observe an alteration in George. Although he never told her of his
attendance at the lectures on Sunday, or the arguments he had had with
friends who held infidel opinions, she soon perceived that George's
feelings were undergoing a rapid and dangerous change. Those subjects on
which he was once in the habit of conversing with her, he now carefully
shunned. He was affectionate and kind to his mother still, and loved her
with all his old intense love, but that ingenuous confidence which he
had always reposed in her was gone. Things that were dear to him now he
could not discuss with her; instead of telling her how he spent his
time, and what were his amusements, he avoided any mention of them. The
deception which he first practised on that night when he yielded to
Ashton's persuasion, was now a system. He reasoned the matter over with
himself: there could be no good in telling her; their opinions were
different; he would take his course, independently of hers.

Uncle Brunton noticed the change; for to those who saw him seldom the
change was sudden. But to George, every day there seemed an epoch, and
he was unconscious of the rapidity with which old associations and ideas
cherished from childhood were thrown down and trampled upon by the new
feelings which had taken possession of him.

"George," said Mr. Brunton to him one day, "I am growing uneasy about
you. I feel that I am not the same to you, nor you to me, we used to be,
only a few months back. I cannot tell the reason--cannot tell when the
difference commenced or how--but for some months past--ever since your
mother's visit to the country--there has been a want of that old
confidential, affectionate intercourse between us there used to be."

"I was younger then," said George, "and the freshness of youthful
feeling and attachment may die away as we advance in years; but I am not
aware that I have ever given you occasion to say I do not love you
sincerely still, uncle. Your kindness to me never can, and never will be
forgotten."

"Well, George, I cannot explain what I mean. I have a kind of feeling
about you that something is wrong which I cannot put into words. I fancy
that if I offer you a word of counsel, you do not receive it as you once
did; if I talk seriously with you, it does not make the same impression,
or touch the spring of the same feelings. You do not talk to me with the
old frankness and candour which made my heart leap, when I thanked God I
had got some one in the world to love, and who loved me. But perhaps I
wrong you, and expect too much from you."

"No, not that, uncle. Frankness, candour, and love are due to you, and
while I have them they shall always be yours; and to prove it, I will
tell what I have never told any one before, what I have hardly spoken to
my own heart. I think of the George Weston you brought away from Dr.
Seaward's, who stood with you beside a father's deathbed, and who,
eighteen months ago, went into Mr. Compton's office; then I think of
George Weston of to-day, and I feel amazed at the change a few years has
made. I have asked myself a hundred times, am I really the same? Oh,
uncle! you do not know what I would give to be that boy again--to live
once more in that old world of sunshine."

Tears started to George's eyes as he spoke, and Mr. Brunton could only
squeeze his hand, and say, "God bless you, my boy! God bless you!"

A few days later Mr. Brunton and Mrs. Weston were one whole evening
together talking about George. Both hearts were heavy, but Mr. Brunton's
was the lighter of the two.

"I tell you what I think will be the very best thing for you and for
George," he said, "It is now the early spring, and the country is
beginning to look fresh and green. Leave this house and take one in the
country. I think George can easily be made to accede to this
proposition--he was always fond of country life and recreations. He can
have a season ticket on the railway, and come down every night. This
will wean him from his associates, and induce him to keep earlier hours,
and give us, too, a better opportunity to lure him back to his old
habits of life."

The arrangements were made. Mrs. Weston, with that loving self-denial
which only a mother can exercise, gave up the house, and her circle of
friends, and took up her residence in the country, about twenty miles
from London. George was pleased with the change, and acquiesced in all
the plans which were made.

About this time, an event happened of considerable importance in the
family history. An old relative of Mrs. Weston's, from whom she had
monetary expectations, died; and upon examination of the will, it was
found that a legacy had been left her of about three thousand pounds,
which was safely invested, and would bring to her an income of nearly a
hundred and fifty pounds a year.

This was a cause of fear and rejoicing to Mrs. Weston--fear, lest it
should be a snare to George, as he would now have the whole of his
salary at his own disposal, there being no longer any necessity for her
to share it; rejoicing, that she should be able to give him that start
in life which had always been the desire and ambition of Mr. Weston.

A few months' trial of Mr. Brunton's plan for weaning George from the
allurements of society in London, by taking a house in the country,
proved it to be a failure. For the first month, George went down almost
immediately after leaving business, but it was only for the first month.
Gradually it became later and later, until the last train was generally
the one by which he travelled. Then it sometimes occurred that he lost
the last train, and was obliged to stay at an hotel in town for the
night. At length, this occurred so frequently, that sometimes for three
nights out of the week he never went home at all. On one of these
occasions, a party of gentlemen in the commercial room of the hotel
where he was staying proposed a game of cards, and asked George to make
one at a rubber of whist. George had often played with his own friends,
but never before with total strangers. However, without any hesitation,
he accepted the invitation, and yielded to the proposition that they
should play sixpenny points. The game proceeded, rubber after rubber was
lost and won, and when George rose from the card-table at a late hour he
was loser to the amount of thirty shillings.

"There is no playing against good cards," said George; "and the run of
luck has been in your favour to-night; but I will challenge you to
another game to-morrow evening, if you will be here?"

The next night George played again, and won back a pound of the money
he had lost on the preceding evening. This was encouraging. "One more
trial," said George to himself, "and nobody will catch me card-playing
for money again with strangers." But that one more trial was the worst
of all. George lost three pounds! He could ill afford it; as it was he
was living at the very extent of his income, and three pounds was a
large sum. He was obliged to give an I O U for the amount, and in the
meantime borrow the sum from one of his friends.

"Hardy, have you got three pounds to lend me?" he asked, next morning;
"you shall have it again to-morrow."

"I have not got that sum with me," said Hardy, "but I can get it for
you. Is it pressing?"

"Yes; I had a hand at cards last night, and lost."

"What! with Ashton?"

"No; with some strangers at the hotel where I have hung out for the last
night or two."

"You shall have that sum early this evening, George; and twice that
amount, if you will make me one promise. I ask it as an old friend, who
has a right to beg a favour. Give up card-playing, don't try to win back
what you have lost; no good can possibly come of it"

"Is Saul among the prophets?" asked George, with something like a
sneer.

"No, George Weston: but a looker-on at chess sees more of the game than
the player; and I have been looking at your last few moves in the game
of life, without taking part with you, and I see you will be checkmated
soon, if you do not alter your tactics. I can't blame you, nor do I wish
to, if I could; but when I first heard you had taken to card playing, I
did feel myself among the prophets then, and prophesied no good would
come of it."

"When you first heard of my card playing?" asked George. "When did you
hear of it?"

"A few days since. My father came up from the country by a late train
one night, and stayed at the hotel you patronize. There he saw you, and
told me about it."

"Confound it! a fellow can't do a thing, even in this great city,
without somebody ferretting it out. But I don't mean to play again. I
have made a fool of myself too many times already; and it serves me
right that I have lost money."

That evening, while George was making his way to the hotel, a lady was
journeying towards the railway station. An hour later, she was at the
house of Mrs. Weston, and was shown into the drawing-room.

"I must apologise," said Mrs. Hardy, for it was she, "in calling upon
you at this hour: but I am very anxious to have some conversation with
you."

"It is strange," said Mrs. Weston, "that as our sons have been intimate
so long, we should have continued strangers; but I am very delighted to
see you, Mrs. Hardy, for I have heard much of you."

"It is with regard to the intercourse between your son and mine that I
have called. I do not wish to alarm you; but I feel it right that you
should be in possession of information I have of your son."

Mrs. Hardy then narrated the circumstances connected with her husband's
visit to the hotel on the evening when he found George there card
playing.

"This evening," she continued, "my son returned home earlier than usual,
and went to his drawer, where I saw him take out some money--two or
three sovereigns. I asked him what he was going to do with it, and after
some difficulty I ascertained he intended lending it to your son. It
occurred to me at once that George Weston was in trouble with those men;
and I thought it only right that you should know."

It was kind of Mrs. Hardy to shew this interest, and Mrs. Weston
esteemed her for it. But had they stood beside the table at which George
was seated while they were talking, or could they have seen the flush of
excitement as he threw down the cards, exclaiming, "By Jove! I've lost
again!" and have watched the flashing eye and heaving breast, they would
have felt, even more keenly than they did, how futile were words or
sympathies to check the evil.




CHAPTER VIII.

A TEST OF FRIENDSHIP.


We pass over two years of George Weston's life--years full of strange
experiences--and look into the office in Falcon-court one morning in the
summer of 18--.

Mr. Compton is away on the Continent for a holiday tour, Mr. Sanders is
still the manager, and nearly all the same old faces are in the office.
George, who is now verging on the legal age of manhood, has risen to a
good position in the establishment, and is regarded as second only to
Mr. Sanders. He is wonderfully altered from when we saw him first in
that office. He is still handsome; but the old sparkling lustre of his
eye has gone, and no trace of boyishness is left.

Hardy is still there. Two years have not made so much difference in him
as George. He looks older than he really is; but there is no mistaking
him for the quiet, gentlemanly Charles Hardy of former days. Lawson and
Williams are there, coarse and bloated young men, whose faces tell the
history of their lives. Hardy rarely exchanges a word with them. George
does more frequently, but not with the air of superiority he once did.

A close observer would have noticed in George that morning a careworn
anxious look; would have heard an occasional sigh, and have seen him at
one time turning pale, and again flushing with a crimson red.

"You are not well," said Hardy. "You have not done a stroke of work all
this morning; quite an unusual thing for you, George."

"I am not well," he replied; "but it is nothing of importance. I shall
get Mr. Sanders to let me off for an hour's stroll when he comes in from
the Bank."

Mr. Sanders came in from the Bank, but he was later than usual. His
round generally occupied an hour; this morning he had been gone between
two and three. George watched him anxiously as he took off his hat,
rubbed his nose violently with his pocket handkerchief, and stood gazing
into the fire, ejaculating every now and then, as was his custom if
anything extraordinary or disagreeable had happened, "Ah! umph!"

"The old boy has found out that the wind has veered to the northeast,
or has stepped upon some orange peel," whispered Lawson to Williams, who
saw that something had gone wrong with the manager.

"Your proposed stroll will be knocked on the head," said Hardy to
George. "Mr. Sanders is evidently in an ill humour."

"I shall not trouble him about it," said George; "shirking work always
worries him, and he seems to be worried enough as it is."

When Mr. Sanders had gazed in the fire for half an hour, and had walked
once or twice up and down the office, as his manner was on such
occasions, he turned to George and said, "I want to speak with you in
the next room."

"I wish you a benefit, Weston," said Williams as he passed. "Recommend
him a day or two in the country, for the good of his health and our
happiness."

"Mr. Weston," said the manager, when George had shut the door and seated
himself, "I am in great difficulties. This event has happened at a most
unfortunate time, Mr. Compton is away, and I don't know how to act for
the best. Will you give me your assistance in the matter?"

"Cannot you make the accounts right, sir?" asked George. "I thought you
had satisfactorily arranged them last night."

"No, Weston; I have been through them over and over again, but I cannot
get any nearer to a balance. I have been round to the Bank this morning
again, and have seen Mr. Smith about it, but he cannot assist me.
However, inquiries will be made this afternoon, and all our accounts
carefully checked and examined; in the meantime, I wish you would have
out the books and go through them for me. Hardy can assist you, if you
like."

"I will do all I can for you, to make this matter right," said George;
"but I can do it better alone. If you will give Hardy the job I was
about, I will check the books here by myself."

All that afternoon George sat alone in Mr. Compton's room surrounded
with books and papers. But he did not examine them. Resting his head
upon his hands, he looked upon them and sighed. Now the perspiration
stood in big drops upon his forehead and his hands trembled. Then he
would walk up and down the room, halting to take deep draughts of water
from a bottle on the table.

Mr. Sanders occasionally looked in to ask how he was going on, and if he
had discovered the error.

"No," said George; "the accounts seem right; but I cannot make them
agree with the cash-book. There is still a hundred pounds short; but I
will go through them again if you like."

"Perhaps you had better. I expect Mr. Smith here by six o'clock; will
you remain with me and see him? He may assist us."

"Certainly," said George; "I feel as anxious as you do about the matter,
for all the bills and cheques have passed through my hands as well as
yours; and I shall not rest easy until the missing amount is
discovered."

Mr. Smith arrived just as the clerks were leaving the office, and Mr.
Sanders and George were alone with him.

"Well," said Mr. Smith, "we have gone carefully over every item to-day,
and at last the defalcation is seen. This cheque," he continued,
producing the document, "is forged. The signature is unquestionably Mr.
Compton's, but the rest of the writing is counterfeit."

"A forged cheque!" exclaimed Mr. Sanders, aghast; "impossible!"

"There must be some mistake here," said George, "the accounts in our
books, if I recollect rightly, correspond with the cheques; but--"

"It is a clumsily arranged affair, although the forgery is a
masterpiece of penmanship," said Mr. Smith; "and if it passes first
through your office, and is entered in your books with the false amount,
it is clear that some one in your employ has committed the offence. I
leave the matter now with you for the present," he added, to Mr.
Sanders; "of course you will put the case at once into the proper medium
and find out the offender."

When Mr. Smith had gone, George sat down again in the seat he had
occupied during that long afternoon, pale and exhausted.

"This is a lamentable business," said Mr. Sanders, pacing the room, "a
lamentable business, indeed! I confess I am completely baffled. Mr.
Weston, I look to you for assistance. Can you form any idea how this
matter has come about? Have you suspicion of any of the clerks?"

"I am equally at a loss with you how to manage in this case. I have no
reason to doubt the integrity of any one in this office. Except one,"
said George, as if a sudden idea had come to his mind. "Yes, I have a
suspicion of one; but I cannot tell even you who it is, until I have
made inquiries sufficient to warrant the suspicion. Can you let the
affair rest over to-night, and in the meantime I will do what I can, and
confer with you in the morning."

"That seems the only plan," answered Mr. Sanders. "If I can render any
assistance in making these inquiries, I will."

"No, thank you, you will have trouble enough in the matter as it is; and
I can do what I have to do better alone."

Half an hour after this conversation, a cab was travelling at the utmost
speed along the Clapham road. It stopped at the house of Harry Ashton,
and George alighted.

"Ashton," said he, "I want to speak to you for two minutes. I have got
into trouble; don't ask me how, or in what way. Unless I can borrow a
hundred pounds to-night, I am ruined. Can you get it for me?"

"My dear George, sit down and calm yourself, and we will talk the matter
over," said Ashton. "It strikes me you are up to some joke, or you would
never suppose that I, an assistant surveyor with a present limited
income, could fork out a hundred pounds down as a hammer.

"I am not joking. I dare not explain more. I require your confidence for
what I have already said; but I know you have money, and moneyed
friends. Can you get it for me anyhow, from anywhere?"

"No, I cannot, and that's plump," answered Ashton; "it is the end of the
quarter, and I have not more than ten pounds in my pocket You are
welcome to that, if it is any good; but I cannot go into the country to
my father's to-night, that is very certain; and if I could, he would not
advance so much without knowing exactly what it was for; nor should I
care to lend that sum, even to you, George, unless I knew what you were
going to do with it, and when I should see it back. If it is so
pressing, you might have my ten, ten more from Dixon, and I could get a
pound or two from other sources."

"No, that would take too long, and I have but an hour or two to make the
arrangements." As he spoke, George fell into a chair, and buried his
face in his hands.

"What, George, my old pippin, what is the matter?" said Ashton, going to
him. "You have lost at cards again, I suppose: but take heart, man,
never get out of pluck for such a thing as that. But you are ill, I know
you are, you are as white as a sheet. Here, take tins glass of brandy."

"I only feel faint." said George, rising. "I shall be all right when I
get out into the open air. Good-bye, Ashton, my old school-chum, we
shall never meet again after to-night; but I shan't forget our happy
days together--I mean the days at Dr. Seaward's--they were the happy
ones, after all."

"George, you are ill, and your brain is touched. Not meet again after
to-night? Nonsense, we don't part so easily, if that is the case;" and
Ashton locked the door, and put the key in his pocket.

"Unfasten that door!" almost shouted George; "you do not know my
strength at this moment, and I might do you some harm; but I should not
like to part with my oldest friend like that. Open the door!"

"Not a bit of it," answered Ashton. "Tell me more particulars, and I
will try what I can do in getting the money."

"No; you have told me you cannot. I have one more chance elsewhere; let
me try that. Ashton, do not be a fool; open that door, and let me go."

"Then I will go with you," answered Ashton; and he unlocked the door.
But while he turned to get his hat, George rushed from the room, opened
the hall-door, and, closing it again upon Ashton, jumped into the cab
awaiting him, and giving the word, "Islington, quick!" drove off,
leaving his friend in the road, running after the vehicle, and calling
upon the driver to stop.

"Don't mind him," George called to the man; "an extra five shillings for
driving quickly."

Ashton was at his wit's end. He ran on, till he could run no longer.
Just then, an empty cab passing, he hailed the driver.

"Drive after that cab in front," said Ashton, as he got in; "follow it
wherever it goes. Sharp's the word, man!"

It was a long time before the traffic in the roads allowed Ashton's cab
to overtake the one ahead; but both came up nearly abreast in the
Waterloo road, and then the one he was pursuing turned abruptly towards
the railway station.

"Ah! George, my old fellow," said Ashton to himself, "you little think I
have been so closely on your scent; but I knew I had not seen the last
of you."

Both cabs drew up at the station steps together. Ashton jumped out, and
ran to meet George; but blank was his astonishment to see an oldish lady
and her attendant alight from the vehicle, which he had imagined
contained his friend!

We will leave Ashton at the Waterloo station in a mortified and
disconsolate state, quarrelling with the driver for having pursued the
wrong cab, and follow George Weston to Islington.

"Hardy," he said, as soon as he found himself alone with his friend,
"are you willing to help me, to save me, perhaps, from ruin? I want to
raise a hundred pounds to-night. I must have it. Do you think you can get
it for me?"

"Me get a hundred pounds? Why, George, my friend, you know the thing is
a clear impossibility. I could not get it, if it were to save my own
life. But why is it so urgent?" he asked.

"You will know in a day or two. I have now one resource left, and only
one. Will you go to-night to my uncle, Mr. Brunton. Tell him that I want
to save a friend from ruin, and want to borrow a hundred and fifty
pounds, which shall be faithfully repaid. Do not give him to understand
I want it for myself, but that it is for a friend dear to him and to me.
Use every argument you can, and above everything persuade him not to
make any inquiries about it at present. Say I shall have to take part of
it into the country to-morrow morning, and I will see him or write to him
in the evening. Say anything you like, so that you can get the money
for me, and prevent him coming to the office to-morrow morning."

"George, I am afraid you have got into some bad business again," said
Hardy. "You know I am willing to help you; but I cannot do so, if it is
to encourage you in getting yourself into still greater trouble."

"This is the last time, Hardy, I shall ever ask a favour of you. Do
assist me; you cannot guess the consequences if you do not."

"Then tell me, George, what it is that is upsetting you. I never saw you
look so wild and excited before. You can confide in me, old fellow; we
have always kept each other's counsel."

"To-morrow you shall know all. Now, do start off at once, and see what
you can do. If you cannot bring all the money, bring what you can. Put
the case urgently to my uncle; he cannot refuse me. I will be here again
in about three hours' time; it will not take you longer than that."

Hardy took a cab, and drove off at once. George remained in the street;
he paced up and down, and took no rest--he was far too excited and
nervous for that. He had got a dangerous game to play, and his plans
were vague and shadowy. He had promised Mr. Sanders he would make
inquiries about the person he suspected had forged the cheque, and let
him know in the morning. His plan was to try and raise the money, pay it
to Mr. Sanders on account of the transgressor, and induce him to take no
further steps until Mr. Compton returned home. On no other ground would
he refund the money on behalf of the forger; and unless Mr. Sanders
would agree to these terms, George was determined the matter might take
its own way, and be placed in the hands of the magistrates or police.

The hours seemed like days to George while Hardy was on his mission. At
length he returned.

"What success?" asked George running to meet him as soon as he came in
view.

"Your uncle is in a terrible state of alarm on your account," replied
Hardy, "and I fear he will be at the office some time to-morrow, although
I tried to persuade him not to do so, because it was no matter in which
you were so deeply interested as he supposed. But he cannot lend you the
money, nor can he get the amount you want until to-morrow afternoon.
However he had fifty pounds with him, and he has sent that."

George took it eagerly. "My plan must fail," he said to Hardy; "but it
would only have been a question of time after all. Hardy, you will hear
strange reports of me after to-morrow; do not believe them all; remember
your old friend as you once knew him, not as report speaks of him.
Good-night, old fellow, you have been a good friend to me. I wish we
could have parted differently."

"Parted!" ejaculated Hardy; "what do you mean? where are you going?"

"I cannot tell, but I shall see you at the office to-morrow morning as
usual; I will tell you more then. Do not say a word to anybody about
what has occurred to-night. I know I may trust you; may I not?"

"Yes, always," answered Hardy; "but I wish you would trust me a little
more, and let me share this trouble with you. We have been old friends
now for years, George; shared ups and downs, and joys and sorrows
together; been brothers in everything which concerned each other's
welfare: and now you are distressed, why not relieve yourself by letting
me bear part of it with you? Recollect our old and earliest days of
friendship, and show that they are still dear to you, as they are to me,
by telling me what has gone wrong with you, and how I can serve or
soothe you in the emergency."

George could not bear this last touch of kindness. Had Hardy reproached
him for having acted foolishly, or warned him from getting into future
trouble; had he even accused him of having sought to lead others astray,
besides wandering in downward paths himself, George could have listened
calmly and unmoved! but this out-going of his friend's heart overcame
him, and he burst into tears.

"Good night, Hardy," he said, wringing his friend's hand. "If a prayer
may come from my lips, so long unused to prayer, I say God bless you,
and preserve you from such a lot as mine." George could not utter
another word; he could only shake hands again, and then hurried away to
the hotel where he sometimes slept.

It was past midnight when he arrived there. Calling for some spirits and
water, and writing materials, he seated himself dejectedly at a table
and wrote. The first letter ran as follows:--

    "MY DEAREST MOTHER,

    "I have some painful news to tell you--so painful that I would rather
    you should have received intelligence of my death, than that which
    this letter contains. I know you will not judge me harshly, dear
    mother; I know you will stretch out to me your forgiveness, and
    still pray for me that I may receive pardon from _your_ heavenly
    Father--would I could say _mine_.

    "Step by step I have been going wrong, as you know--as I might have
    known--and now I have sunk to the lowest depths, from which I shall
    never rise again. Mother, I know the sorrow you will feel when you
    hear what has happened. I grieve more for you than I do for myself;
    I would give all the world, if I had it, to save your heart the
    misery which awaits it, from the conduct of a worthless, rebellious
    son.

    "I cannot bear to see that sorrow. My heart seems nearly broken as
    it is, and it would quite break if I were to see you suffering as
    you will suffer.

    "I could not bear to see again any whom I have known under other
    circumstances. I could not bear to be taunted with all the
    remembrances of the past. Dear mother, I have resolved to leave
    you--leave London--perhaps leave England. I _may_ never see you
    again; it is better for you that I never should.

    "My tears blind me as I write; if tears could cleanse the past, my
    guilt would be soon removed. God bless you, dearest mother! I will
    write to you again; and some day, after I have been into new scenes,
    started anew in life, and won back again the character I have
    lost--then, perhaps, I may once more see you again.

    "Uncle Brunton will tell you more. He will comfort you; he must be
    husband, brother, and son to you now.

    "God bless you, my dearest mother! I have so wronged you, have been
    such a continual trouble to you, instead of the comfort poor father
    thought I should have been, and so unworthy of your love, that I
    hardly dare hope you will forgive and forget the past, and still
    pray for

    "Your erring Son--

    "GEORGE WESTON."

George then wrote two letters to Mr. Brunton. In one of them he thanked
him for all his care and kindness, passionately regretted the causes of
anxiety he had given him, and the disgrace which now attached to his
name. In the other, he begged the loan of the L50 sent to him through
Hardy, which, he said, he hoped to pay back in a few years. He also
requested that Mr. Brunton would arrange all his accounts, and pay them
either from his mother's income, or by advancing the money as a loan.

When the morning dawned, it found George still writing. As the clock
struck seven, he packed up what few things he had with him, paid his
hotel bill, and drove off to Falcon-court. He was there by eight
o'clock, before any of the clerks had arrived.

"Have the letters come?" he asked the housekeeper.

"Yes, sir, they are in Mr. Compton's room," was the answer.

George hastened into the room, looked through the packet, and alighting
upon a letter with a foreign post-mark addressed to Mr. Sanders in Mr.
Compton's handwriting, he broke the seal. The note was short, merely
saying that he had arrived in Paris, on his way home, and expected to be
back in a day or two; therefore any communications must be forwarded at
once, or he would have left Paris.

George went direct to the Electric Telegraph Office. A form was handed
to him, on which the message he desired to send must be written, and he
filled it up thus:--

    "_From Mr. Sanders to Mr. Compton_.

    "Come back at once. A cheque has been forged in your name for
    _L100._ George Weston is the forger. It is a clear and aggravated
    case. Shall he be arrested? Will you prosecute? Answer at once."

In an incredibly short space of time an answer was returned. George was
at the Telegraph Office to receive it.

    "_From Mr. Compton to Mr. Sanders._

    "I will return to-morrow. Take no steps in the matter; let it be
    kept silent, I am deeply grieved, but I will not prosecute under any
    circumstances."

"Well, Mr. Weston," said Mr. Sanders, when George entered the office,"
I expected you would have been here before; but I suppose you have had
some difficulty in your investigations?"

"I have had difficulty," George answered. "I have been endeavouring to
borrow a hundred pounds to pay the deficiency, and then I would have
screened the forger; but my plan has failed, and it is better that it
should, because the innocent would have been sure to have suffered for
the guilty. I am now bound to tell you the name of the criminal upon his
own confession."

"Who is it? who is it?" asked Mr. Sanders, eagerly.

"I--George Weston," he answered. "No matter how I did it, or why; I
alone am guilty."

Mr. Sanders caught hold of the back of a chair for support. His hands
trembled, and his voice failed him.

"It is a shock to you, sir," said George; "and it will be a shock to Mr.
Compton. Give him this letter when he comes home, it will explain the
circumstances to him. I deeply regret that I should have caused you so
much anxiety as I have during the past week, while this inquiry has been
pending. I knew the truth must come out sooner or later--but I would
rather you should know it from me; crushed and ruined as I am, I have no
hope that you will look with any other feelings than those of abhorrence
on me, but you do not know the heavy punishment I have already suffered,
or you would feel for me."

"Are you aware, George Weston, that there is a yet heavier punishment,
and that, as Mr. Compton's representative, I shall feel it my painful
duty to--"

"No, sir; here is Mr. Compton's opinion upon the case," said George,
handing the telegraphic message to Mr. Sanders, who listened with
astonishment as he explained the circumstances. "But should Mr. Compton,
upon a careful examination into the case, wish to prosecute," he
continued, "I will appear whenever and wherever he pleases. And now, Mr.
Sanders, I leave this office, ruined and disgraced, the result of my own
folly and sin."

George spoke hoarsely, and his face was pale as Death. Mr. Sanders was
moved; and put out his hand to shake hands with him, and say good-bye,
but George held his back.

"Remember, sir, you are an honest man; you cannot shake hands with me,"
said George.

"Weston, I am not your judge; there is One who will judge not only this
act, but all the acts that have led to it," said Mr. Sanders, solemnly.
"I have had more interest and greater hopes in you than in any young man
who ever came into this office; and I feel more sorrow now, on your
account, than I can put into words. Do not let this great and disastrous
fall sink you into lower depths of sin. If you have forfeited man's
respect and esteem, there is a God with whom there is mercy and
forgiveness. Seek Him, and may He bless you! Good-bye, George Weston,"
and the manager, with tears in his eyes, wrung the cold, trembling hand
that was stretched out to his.

George took up his carpet-bag, which he had brought from the hotel, and
was about to leave, but he paused a moment.

"Will you send Hardy in here?" he asked Mr. Sanders. "I must have a word
with him before I go."

Hardy had been expecting all the morning to have some explanation from
George, and had been uneasy at his absence. When he went into Mr.
Compton's room he was surprised to see George, with his bag in his hand,
ready to make a departure.

"Hardy," said George, "I told you last night I should soon have to bid
you good-bye, and now the time has arrived. I am going away from the
office, and perhaps from England, but I cannot tell you where I am
going. I leave in disgrace; my once good name is now blighted and
withered; my old friends will look upon me with abhorrence."

"No, George, I am one of your old friends; I never shall," interrupted
Hardy. "I do not know what you have done, nor do I wish to know, but I
cannot believe your heart and disposition are changed, or will ever
change so much as to make me regard you in any other light than that of
a dear and valued friend. But where are you going, George? Do tell me
that."

"No, Hardy, I cannot. I am going away, God only knows where; it may be
abroad, it may not. I am going somewhere where I shall not be known, and
where I can try to work back for myself a character and a good name,
which I can never redeem in London. Some day I may let you know where I
am."

"But, George, does your mother know where you are going?"

"No," said George, and his voice was tremulous as he spoke. "No; I have
no mother now. I am too fallen to claim relationship with one so good
and noble and holy as my mother is."

"Oh, George, give up this wild scheme! Have you thought that you are
going the most direct way to break your mother's heart, and to make her
life, as well as your own, blank, solitary, and miserable? Whatever
wrong you have done, do not add to it by breaking that commandment which
bids us honour our parents. Your mother has claims upon you which you
have no right to disregard in this way."

"I have thought it all well over, Hardy. I believe it is for her good
as well as for mine that our paths should run differently, but I cannot
explain all now. I am in dread lest my uncle should call here before I
get away. Hardy, good-bye, old fellow."

"No, I cannot say good-bye yet. George, give me your address; promise to
let me see you again, and I will promise to keep your secret sacredly."

"I do not know where I am going; I have no fixed plan; but I do promise
to write to you, Hardy."

"And now, George, make me one other promise. If you are in difficulties,
and I can assist you, or do anything for you in any way, at any time,
you will let me know--remember I shall always be Charles Hardy to you,
and you will always be George Weston to me. Do you agree?"

"Yes, Hardy, I agree. I cannot thank you. I cannot say what I would, or
tell you what I feel. May you be blessed and be happy, and never know
what it is to have a heavy, broken heart like mine. And now one promise
from you. Go and see my mother; try and comfort her; tell her how I
grieve to part from her."

George could not continue; the nervous twitching of his face showed the
struggle within, and it was a relief when the hot tears broke through
and coursed down his cheek. Hardy was greatly affected. He loved George
with an intensity of love like that which knit together the soul of
Jonathan and David; he had been to him more than a brother ever since
they had been acquainted; in hours of business and recreation, in joys
and sorrows, in plans and aims, they had been one; and now the tie was
to be severed, and severed under such sad circumstances.

There is a solemnity about sorrow which speech desecrates. Not another
word was spoken by either--both hearts were too full for that; but as
the tears ran thickly down their cheeks, they grasped each other's hand,
and then, fairly sobbing, George hurried from the office.




CHAPTER IX.

IN EXILE.


George went direct from the office to the railway station, and took a
ticket to Plymouth. He had but a short time to wait before the train
left, and bore him away. The green fields and smiling country were
nothing to him; he felt no pleasure in seeing the merry, happy children
playing in the lanes, as the train whizzed past. The greetings of
friends on the platforms at the different stations only made him sigh.
Who would greet him on his journeys? Tired and worn out with sleepless
nights and anxious days, he tried to doze, but the attempt was vain. He
feared lest some one might have tracked his steps to the station, and
have telegraphed for him to be stopped at the terminus. Then, when he
had thought and pondered over such probabilities as these, and
endeavoured to dismiss them, he tried to form some plans for the future;
but all the future was dark--no ray of light, however faint or distant,
could be seen, and every plan he would make must be left to
circumstances. When the passengers alighted at one of the stations to
take refreshments, George got out too, for the purpose of breaking his
long fast. He tried to eat a biscuit, but he could not get it down,--all
appetite was gone; so, drinking a glass of ale, he wandered to the book
stall, and purchased a newspaper to read during the remainder of the
journey. The train started off again, and George settled himself to
read. The first thing that met his eye was an account of the assizes,
and the first case was headed, "Forgery by a Banker's Clerk." This
brought back to remembrance, more vividly than ever, the sad scenes of
the past few days; he threw the paper out of the window, and abandoned
himself to thought.

At last the train arrived at Plymouth. George hastened on to the
platform, and walked rapidly into the town, fearing lest any one should
recognize him, or lest any official should wish to detain him. With his
bag in hand, he wandered through the streets, uncertain what to do or
where to go. Presently he came to a small house, in an obscure street,
with a placard in the window stating that apartments were to let. He
knocked, and was answered by the landlady, a respectable looking woman,
who told him that she had a bedroom and sitting-room to let, and would
accommodate him on reasonable terms. George said he should not require
the room more than a few days, or a week, as he was about to leave by
one of the vessels in the port. The terms were arranged, and he at once
took possession. As it was very late, he thought he would go to bed
without delay.

"Will you not have some supper first?" asked the landlady.

"No, thank you," said George: "I am tired with my journey, and shall be
glad to get to sleep as soon as I can."

"But, sir, you really look ill," persisted the landlady, who was a kind,
motherly woman; "will you let me make you a little spirits and water?"

"I will not refuse that," said George, "for I do feel ill. Parting with
friends and relatives is at all times a disagreeable matter, and I have
bidden good-bye to them in London to-day, rather than bring them down
here."

"Ah, sir! parting is a sad thing," answered the woman. "It is two years
since my son went to sea; he was much about your age, sir, and he went
away against my wish, and I have never seen or heard from him since. He
has nearly broken my heart, poor boy, and left me all alone in this
wide, hard world."

George was glad to have some one to talk to, but he was distressed by
this narration of his landlady. If she mourned for her son, who had been
absent for two years, how would his mother mourn?

George passed a restless, anxious night; when he dozed off to sleep, it
was only to be tormented with harrowing dreams, in which he fancied
himself at one time standing before a judge in a court of justice,
answering to the crime of forgery. At another, gazing upon a funeral
procession moving slowly and solemnly along, with his Uncle Brunton
following as sole mourner. Then he would start up, half with joy and
half with sorrow, as he fancied he heard voices like those of his mother
and uncle calling to him from the street. His head ached, and his heart
was heavy. He felt thankful when the morning dawned, and it was time to
rise. He bathed his hot, feverish head in water, and dressed; but as he
passed by the looking-glass and caught a glance at his pale, haggard
countenance, so changed within a few short hours, he started.

"Oh, God! give me strength! give me strength!" he said. "If I should be
ill, if anything should happen to me, what should I do? I am all alone;
there is no one to care for me now!" And he sank down in a chair,
burying his face in his hands as if to hide the picture his mind had
drawn.

After breakfast, he strolled to the docks, looked over some of the
vessels, and made inquiries about the shipping offices. He learned that
a ship was about to sail immediately to Port Natal, and that all
information could be obtained of the agents. Thither George repaired;
the agent gave him an exaggerated account of the signal prosperity which
all enterprising young men met with in Natal, praised Pietermaritzburg,
the capital of the colony, and offered to give him letters of
introduction to residents there, who would advise him as to the best
ways of making a comfortable living. The agent then took him down to the
vessel, told him that he must take a passage at once, if he wished to
leave by her, as she would sail in two or three days at the latest. It
was a matter of comparative indifference to George where he went--the
large, lonely world was before him, and Port Natal might make him as
good a home as anywhere else. George went back with the agent to the
office, and paid a deposit of fifteen pounds on the passage money.

"What is your name, sir?" asked the agent, with pen in hand, ready to
make the entry.

George coloured as he answered, "Frederick Vincent."

"Then, Mr. Vincent, you will be on board not later than nine o'clock on
Tuesday morning; the vessel will go out of harbour by twelve. You can
come on board as much earlier as you like, but I have named the latest
time. You had better send your luggage down on Monday."

"Luggage?" said George. "Oh, yes! that shall be sent in time."

As George returned to his lodgings, he felt even more wretched than when
he started out It was Wednesday morning, and the vessel would not leave
till the following Tuesday. The excitement of choosing a vessel was
over; there was now only the anxiety and suspense of waiting its
departure. True, he had his outfit to purchase, but this would have to
be done furtively; he could not bear to be walking in the streets in
broad daylight, noticed by passers-by, every one of whom he fancied knew
his whole history, and was plotting either to prevent his departure, or
to reveal his secret.

Mrs. Murdoch (that was the name of his landlady) endeavoured to make him
as comfortable as possible in his apartments; but external comfort was
nothing to George--he wanted some word of love, some one to talk to, as
in days of old. He avoided conversation as much as possible with Mrs.
Murdoch, for she would talk of her absent son, and every word went as an
arrow to George's heart.

That first day seemed a week. Hour after hour dragged wearily along, and
when six o'clock in the evening came, George thought all time must have
received some disarrangement, for it seemed as if days had elapsed since
the morning. He went out after dark to a neighbouring shop and made some
purchases of outfit; but he was thankful when he had completed his task,
for he had noticed a man walking backwards and forwards in front of the
shop, and he felt a nervous dread lest it should be some spy upon him.
He resolved that he would remain in his rooms, and not go out again
until he left for the voyage on Tuesday, but would ask Mrs. Murdoch to
make the remainder of the necessary purchases for him.

How lonely and desolate George felt that night! More than once he half
determined rather to bear shame and reproach, and have the society of
those he loved, than continue in that dreadful isolation. He was
thoroughly unmanned. "Oh, that Hardy or Ashton were here, or any friend,
just to say, 'George Weston, old fellow,' once more; what a weight of
dreariness it would remove!" Then he would wonder what was going on at
home, whether his mother was plunged in grief, or whether she was
saying, "He has brought it all on himself, let him bear it." But George
could not reconcile this last thought; he tried hard to cherish it; he
felt he would infinitely rather know his mother was filled with anger
and abhorrence at his crime, than that she mourned for him, and longed
to press him to her bosom and bind up the wounded heart. But he could
not shake off this last idea. It haunted him every moment, and added to
the weight of sorrow which seemed crushing him.

Thursday, Friday, and Saturday passed, and George was still the victim
to anxiety and corroding care. He had paced his room each day, and
tossed restlessly in his bed each night; had tried reading and writing,
to while away the time, and had found every attempt futile.

Mrs. Murdoch was anxious on his account.

"Mr. Vincent," she said to him, "you eat nothing, you take no exercise;
you don't sleep at night, for I can hear you, from my room, tossing
about; and I am doctor enough to know that you are ill, and will be
worse, if you do not make some alteration. Do be persuaded by me, and
take some little recreation, or else you will not be in a fit state to
go on board on Tuesday."

"You are very kind, Mrs. Murdoch," replied George, "but I have no bodily
ailment. If I could get a change of thought, that is the best physic for
a mind diseased."

"It is, sir," replied the landlady; "and now will you think me rude if I
tell you how you may have that change of thought? You are about to start
on a very dangerous voyage; for long months you will have the sky above
and the sea below, and only a few planks between you and death. Have
you, sir, committed your way to the Lord, and placed your life in His
hands? I know it is a strange thing to ask you, but I hope you will not
be offended. You have seemed so sad for the past day or two, that I
could not help feeling you wanted comfort, and none can give it but the
Heavenly Friend."

"I do want comfort and support, Mrs. Murdoch, but--"

"No, sir, there is no _but_ in the case. 'Come onto Me, all ye that are
weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest'--is said to all; and
we only have to go to Him to find all we want."

"Well, Mrs. Murdoch, I will see if I cannot combine both your
suggestions; and as to-morrow will be Sunday, it will be a recreation to
go to some church or chapel. Can you recommend me a good preacher?"

"Yes, sir, that I can. If you will go to my pew at chapel to-morrow
morning, I am sure you will like the gentleman who preaches there."

"Then I will go," said George.

When he went up to his room again, those few words of Mrs. Murdoch were
still speaking to him.

"'Weary and heavy laden!' he thought; surely that is my lot. I so young,
once so happy, to feel weary and heavy laden; how strange! But no, it is
not strange--it is natural. Sin brings its punishment, and it is hard
work, bearing its burden! oh! that I could find some spot where I could
rest."

There was a spot, not far from George, where he could have rested, but
he did not know it. He was oppressed with his weariness, and he longed
for peace and ease of mind to come to him. He did not consider the
words, "Come unto ME."

There was an old Family Bible on the book-case in his room, and George
took it down. It was a long time since he had read the Word of God: and
when he had it was only to compare it with the dangerous opinions he had
received, and find out what he imagined to be its discrepancies and
contradictions. A feeling of remorse came over him as he put the book on
the table.

"What right have I to open this book, or attempt to find anything here
for encouragement?" he asked himself. "I have mocked and ridiculed it in
days of prosperity, and yet I am willing to take it up in trouble, as if
it were an old friend. Ah! it was an old friend once, but that has all
gone by now."

He sat a long time looking at the book. Perhaps there is nothing that
brings back the memories of the past more vividly than the sight of a
Family Bible to one who has long ceased to read and love it. There are
old scenes of childhood associated with it which time can never erase.
Who cannot remember sitting on his mother's knee, or with chair drawn up
beside his father, hearing its sweet music sounded in the home circle on
the Sabbath night? Who can forget the last evening of the holidays
before going back to school, when the old book was brought out, and some
useful text was selected as a monitor and remembrancer? Who can forget
the time when some loved one was ill, and as friends and relatives sat
round the bed of the invalid, the Book was laid upon the table, and
words of comfort were proclaimed to all.

Many and many a scene moved past George in the mental panorama which the
sight of Mrs. Murdoch's book created. He seemed not to be remembering,
but to be living in the former days. There was his father seated in the
old arm-chair, with Carlo, the faithful dog at his feet, and his elbows
rented upon the table, and his head upon his hand--a favourite
attitude--as he read the Sacred Word. There was dear old Dr. Seaward,
with his spectacles stuck up on his forehead, in his study at
Folkestone, and a party of boys round him, listening eagerly to the
words of instruction and advice which fell from his lips.

And then the past merged into the present, and George started to find
himself alone in a strange room, in a strange town, with a strange Bible
before him.

He opened the Book and read. The fifty-first Psalm was the portion of
Scripture to which he inadvertently turned, commencing, "Have mercy upon
me, O God, according to thy loving-kindness; according unto the
multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions."

He read the Psalm through in amazement. Again he read it, with
increased wonder and astonishment, that any one should have made a
prayer so exactly like that which he felt in his heart he wanted to
pray; and at last he went to the door and locked it, for fear of
interruption, took the Bible from the table and placed it on a chair,
and kneeling down read the prayer again; and repeating it aloud,
sentence by sentence, offered it up as his petition to the throne of
Mercy.

       *       *       *       *       *

On Sunday morning, when the bells were ringing their glad peals, and the
people were already in the streets, on their way to the different places
of worship, George started off, directed by Mrs. Murdoch, to the chapel
of which she had spoken to him.

He felt very sad as he walked along; it was the last Sunday, perhaps, he
should ever spend in England, and he must spend it alone, an alien from
all whom he loved. The temporary calm which he had experienced on the
previous evening had gone; no prayer for assistance through the day had
issued from his lips that morning, but there was the old feeling of
shame, and chagrin, and disgrace, which had haunted him for the past
week, and with it the dogged determination to bear up against it until
it should be lost in forgetfulness. But George had resolved to go to
chapel that morning, because he felt he wanted a change of some sort,
and there was a melancholy pleasure in spending a part of his last
Sunday in England after his once customary manner.

The preacher was an old gentleman, of a mild, benevolent countenance,
and with a winning, persuasive manner. When he gave out the first hymn,
reading it solemnly and impressively, George felt he should have
pleasure in listening to the sermon. The congregation joined in the hymn
of praise, with heart and voice lifted up to the God of the Sabbath in
thanksgiving. The singing was rich and good, and George, who was a
passionate lover of music, was touched by its sweet harmony. He did not
join in the hymn, his heart was too full for that; but the strains were
soothing, and produced a natural, reverential emotion which he had been
long unaccustomed to feel.

The minister took for his text the words, "'Lord, if thou wilt, thou
canst make me clean.' And Jesus put forth His hand, and touched him,
saying, 'I will, be thou clean.'"

A rush of joy thrilled through George as he heard the words. His
attention was rivetted as he listened to the simple story of the leper
being restored to health; and when the preacher drew the comparison
between leprosy and sin, and revealed Jesus as the Great Physician to
the sick soul, who, in reply to the heartfelt wish, could say, "Thy
sins, which are many, are all forgiven thee," George felt the whole
strength of his soul concentrated in that one desire, "Lord, if thou
wilt, thou canst make _me_ clean." He looked into his own heart--he was
almost afraid to look--and saw the ravages of disease there. He thought
of his past life; there was not one thing to recommend him to God.
NEVER before had he seen his sin in the light in which it was now
revealed by God's Word. He had viewed it in relation to man's opinion,
and his own consciousness; but now the Holy Spirit was striving within
him, and showing him his position in the sight of God.

The preacher went on to unfold the sweet story of the Cross, to tell of
the simple plan of salvation, and to point to Jesus, the Lamb of God,
"who taketh away the sins of the world." It seemed to George as if he
had never heard the glad tidings before; it had never made the hot tear
run down his cheek, as he thought of the Saviour suffering for sins not
His own, until now; it had never before torn the agonised sigh from his
heart, as the truth flashed before him that it was he who had helped to
nail the Holy One to the accursed tree; he had never realised before
that earth was but the portal to the heavenly mansions--that time was
but the herald of eternity. Now, all these things came crowding upon his
mind, and when the sermon concluded he was in a bewilderment of joy and
sorrow.

A parting hymn was sung--that glorious old hymn--

     "There is a fountain filled with blood,
         Drawn from Emmanuel's veins."

When it came to those lines--

     "The dying _thief_ rejoiced to see
         That fountain in his day;
     And there may I, though vile as he,
         Wash all my sins away:"

he could bear it no longer: he could not restrain the torrent of tears
which was struggling to get free; he could not stay in that assembly of
people; he must be alone, alone with God, alone with his own heart.

When he reached his apartments, he went immediately to his room, and
there, beside his bed, he knelt and poured out his soul to God. Words
could not tell his wants, words could not express his contrition; but
there he knelt, a silent pleader, presenting himself with all the dark
catalogue of a life's sin before his dishonoured God.

George thought he had experienced the extremity of sorrow during the few
days he had been in Plymouth, but it was as nothing compared with that
he now felt. He had grieved over name and reputation lost, prospects
blighted, and self-respect forfeited, but now he mourned over a God
dishonoured, a Saviour slighted, a life mis-spent. Is there any sorrow
like unto that sorrow which is felt by a soul crushed beneath the sense
of sin?

How that day passed, George hardly knew. He felt his whole life
epitomised in those few hours spent in solemn confession. Oh, how he
longed to realise a sense of pardon--to know and feel, as the leper knew
and felt, that he was made clean. But he could not do so: he only felt
himself lost and ruined, and found expression but in one cry, "Unclean!
unclean!"

He was aroused in the evening by the ringing of church bells again; and,
taking a hasty cup of tea, at Mrs. Murdoch's solicitation, he once more
bent his steps to the place of worship he had visited in the morning,
with the earnest desire and prayer that he might hear such truths
taught as would enable him to see Jesus.

How often does God "_devise means_ that His banished be not expelled
from Him," and in His providential mercy order those events and
circumstances to occur, which are instrumental in preparing the mind for
the reception of His truth! It was no chance, no mere coincidence, that
the preacher took for his text those words which were associated with so
many recollections of George, "_for me to live is Christ_."

Simply, but earnestly, he drew pictures of life, in its many phases, and
contrasted them with the one object worth living for. Upon all else was
written, vanity of vanities--living for pleasure was but another name
for living for future woe: living for wealth was losing all; living for
honour was but heaping condemnation for the last day: while living for
Christ gave not only pleasure, and riches, and honour here, but
hereafter. Then he spoke of the preciousness of Jesus to those who
believe, as the sympathising Friend, and the loving Brother; of the
honour and joy of living for Him who had died to bring life and
immortality to light; and of that "peace which passeth understanding."

That night there was joy in the presence of the angels of God over a
new-born soul. As George listened to the voice of the preacher, there
fell from his eyes as it had been scales, and he saw the Father running
to embrace the returning prodigal, and felt the kiss of His forgiving
love. The words which his earthly father had last spoken to him, were
those chosen by his heavenly Father to show him his new blissful
relationship as a son. And at what a gracious time! George was a
wanderer, an outcast, without father or friend, without object or aim in
life, and the doors of heaven were thrown open to him; the sympathy of
Divine love was poured into that aching heart, and the words of
rejoicing were uttered, "This, MY SON, was dead, and is alive again; was
lost, and is found."

The weary one was at rest, the heart of stone palpitated with a living
breath, "The dead one heard the voice of the Son of God, and lived."

Who can sympathise with George as he sat in his room that night,
overwhelmed with joy unspeakable? He was a new creature in a new world;
old things had passed away, behold all things had become new. He looked
up to heaven as his home, to God as his Father, to Jesus as his great
elder Brother; and he realised his life as hidden with Christ in God,
redeemed and reconciled, henceforth not his own, but given to Him who
had washed him, and made him clean in His own blood.

       *       *       *       *       *

Great joy is harder to bear than great sorrow. George had suddenly gone
from one to the other extreme, and at a time when he was suffering from
physical prostration, the result of such strong mental struggles.

"Mr. Vincent, it is nine o'clock," Mrs. Murdoch called out, as she
knocked at his door next morning. No answer was returned.

"Mr. Vincent, will you come down to breakfast, sir?" she repeated more
loudly, but with no greater success.

Again she knocked, wondering that George should sleep so soundly, and be
so difficult to arouse, as he was accustomed to answer at the first
call.

"Mr. Vincent, breakfast is waiting!"

No answer coming, Mrs. Murdoch was anxious; she knew George had been
really ill for several days past, and had noticed his strange manner on
the previous evening. Without further hesitation, she opened the door,
and there on the floor lay George Weston, insensible, having apparently
fallen while in the act of dressing.

Calling for assistance, she at once laid him upon the bed, applied all
the restoratives at hand, and without a moment's delay despatched a
messenger to the chemist in the next street, with instructions for him
to attend immediately.




CHAPTER X.

MAKING DISCOVERIES.


"Will you grant me leave of absence for to-day?" Charles Hardy asked Mr.
Sanders, a few minutes after George had left the office, on the gloomy
and eventful morning when he disclosed the secret of his guilt.

"I hardly know what to say--what to do," answered Mr. Sanders, puffing
and blowing; "business will come to a stand-still--the shutters had
better go up at once. But if you want particularly to be off to-day, I
suppose I must manage to spare you."

"I may want several days, sir; but if that should be the case, I will
return to the office to-morrow in time to see Mr. Compton immediately he
comes back"

It was but the work of five minutes for Charles to write a short note,
change his office coat, and prepare to start The note was addressed to
Mr. Brunton, care of Mr. Sanders till called for, and ran as follows:--

    "MY DEAR SIR,

    "Do not be more uneasy than necessary about George. I think I have a
    clue by which his address may be ascertained. If so, I will report
    progress to you to-night; but I leave this note for you, in order to
    allay the distress you will feel in learning he is not here. Rest
    assured of my earnest desire to serve my dear friend, and to relieve
    him if possible. My time and services you may command in this cause.
    In haste,

    "Yours very faithfully,

    "CHARLES HARDY."

Hardy had a clue, it is true; but it was a very faint one. He had
noticed, upon the table of Mr. Compton's room, a "Bradshaw's Railway
Guide;" and as he had not seen one there previously, he imagined it must
have been brought in by George, with his carpet-bag and other things,
and there left. One page of the book was turned down; Hardy had eagerly
opened it, and found it referred to the departures from the Great
Western Station.

"I'll go on at once to that station," he thought. "He told me he might
be leaving England; perhaps he has gone to Liverpool, Plymouth, or Cork,
or some shipping place that can be reached by this line. At all events,
I have no other chance but this."

With all speed Charles drove off to Paddington. Diligently he conned
over the intricate mysteries of "Bradshaw" as he journeyed along,
endeavouring to ascertain when trains would be leaving for any of the
places to which he had imagined his friend might be going. It is hardly
necessary to say he could not find what he wanted; but his anxiety and
suspense were relieved by the search.

Before alighting at the station, Hardy carefully glanced all around to
ascertain that George was not in sight; for it was not his intention to
speak to him or endeavour to turn him from his purpose, knowing that, in
his present excited state he would stand no chance whatever of
frustrating his friend's plans, but would rather be adopting the most
certain means of destroying his own. Hardy's present object was only to
try and find out to what part George would travel, and then communicate
with Mr. Brunton and get his advice how to proceed.

Cautiously he walked along the platform, looking into every
waiting-room, and making inquiries of the porters it they had seen any
one answering to the description he gave of George. This course proving
futile, he went to the ticket-office, and consulted a time-table, to
find whether any train had recently left for any of the places which, he
felt convinced, were the most probable for George to choose. An hour or
two had elapsed since the last train left, and George had not had more
than twenty minutes' start ahead of him. He took down in his pocket-book
the time for the departure of the next train; and then choosing a
secluded spot in the office, where he would be out of observation, and
yet able to see all who came up for tickets, he waited patiently until
the slow, dawdling hand of the clock neared the hour.

Hardy felt the chances were fifty to one that while he was waiting there
George might be at some other station, leaving London without a trace to
his whereabouts; he thought whether, after all, George might not have
purposely, instead of accidentally, left the "Bradshaw" with that
particular page turned down, in order that, should he be sought, a wrong
scent might be given; and even if he intended to travel by this line and
to one of these particular places, might he not choose nighttime as the
most desirable for his object? But Hardy had _purpose_ in him; he would
not throw away the strongest clue he had, although that was faint, and
he resolved to stay there until midnight, it need be, rather than
abandon his design,

His patience was not put to such a test as this. While he was standing,
with palpitating heart, behind that door in the booking office, George
was in the porters' room, not a hundred yards off, waiting with deeper
anxiety for the clock to point to the hour when the train should start.
Presently, the first bell rang. A number of people, with bags and
packages in hand, came crowding up to the ticket office, but George was
not there. Hardy could scarcely refrain from rushing out to look around.
What if he should get into a train without a ticket, or send a guard to
procure one for him? A hundred doubts and fears were pressing upon him,
and--the second bell rang. Two or three minutes more, and the train
would be off. At the moment he was consulting his pocket-book to see how
long a time must elapse before the next train would leave, he started
with joyful surprise to see George walk hurriedly up to the office and
obtain a ticket. As hurriedly he disappeared. "Now is my chance,"
thought Hardy.

"Where did that young man take his ticket for?" he asked the clerk, as
soon as he had elbowed his way past the few remaining persons who were
before the window.

"Which one?" said he; "two or three young men have just taken tickets."

"I mean the last ticket but one you issued?"

"Plymouth."

"Hurrah!" cried Hardy, to the astonishment of the clerk, who probably
would not have given the information, had he not thought the inquirer
wanted a ticket for the same place.

Hardy was too cautious, even in the moment of his surprise, to let his
object be lost by over-haste; he knew it would not be wise to let
himself be seen, and though he longed to rush after George and say,
"Good-bye, cheer up, old chap!" he only allowed himself the painful
pleasure of looking through the window of a waiting-room, and seeing his
old friend and chum, sad and solitary, get into the carriage. Shriek
went the whistle, and away went the train. Whether it whizzed along so
rapidly, or the smoke and steam enveloped it, or from whatever cause it
was, Charles Hardy found his sight growing dimmer, until a mist shut out
the scene.

From the station Hardy went home. He wanted to tell his parents some of
the occurrences of the day, and let them know of his expected absence.
He knew that he had difficulties to meet. George had always been kindly
received by Mr. and Mrs. Hardy; they both liked him, and were glad when
he came to spend an evening at their house. But latterly they had been
rather anxious about the growing intimacy between him and their son, and
often had a word of caution been given that Charles should be very
careful how far he allowed his friend to influence him.

Now Hardy could only tell his parents that George had got into worse
trouble than ever--such trouble that he was obliged to leave his
situation, and had decamped, no one except himself knew where. Of course
Mr. and Mrs. Hardy would not put a good construction upon the affair. He
anticipated they would say, "Well, I always feared he would come to
this;" and would try to dissuade Charles from having anything more to do
with him. It was not to be expected they would look with such leniency
upon the matter as he would. Therefore, it was with no small difficulty
he proceeded, immediately upon reaching home, to tell them of what had
occurred. It was a short story, and soon told.

"Now, father," said Hardy, before allowing him time to bring objections
to the part he had performed that day, "I have promised Mr. Brunton to
assist in finding George, and I have told Mr. Sanders I may be away some
days from the office. I know Mr. Compton will not object to this; if
that is all, I can have this leave of absence instead of the holiday he
promised me next mouth. George must be found; if I can help it, he shall
not leave England--at all events, not in this way. I know it will kill
Mrs. Weston, if he does."

"Well, Charles, I know your kindheartedness, and I appreciate it; but I
cannot give my consent to the plan. Recollect, by associating yourself
with your former friend now, you do injury to yourself; he has got
himself into disgrace--he must bear the burden of it. What will Mr.
Compton think, when he hears that you--you who have always maintained
such strict integrity--have gone off after a dishonest, runaway clerk?"

"I never wish to run counter to your opinions, father, if I can help it;
but I must do so now, George Weston is my friend--not _was_ my friend,
as you said just now--and I would not act such a cowardly part as to
desert him. Don't be vexed at what I say; I know you advise for my good;
but you do not know how I feel in this matter. Suppose our positions
were changed, and I had done as George has done--there is no
impossibility in such a case--I am too weak against temptation to doubt
that had I been placed in the circumstances similar to his, I might have
done the same, Suppose I had, what would you have thought of me? Should
I have been your dishonest, runaway son, to whom all friendship must be
denied, and who might be left to bear any burden alone, because I had
brought it upon myself? No, father; you would be the first to seek and
comfort me, and the first to cry 'Shame!' upon any of my friends who
turned and kicked me the moment I had fallen."

Mr. Hardy could not resist the force of his son's argument, nor could he
refrain from admiring the genuineness of his friendship for George, and
the manly determination he had formed to assist him.

"Well, Charles," he said, "I do not blame you for taking this course. I
hope it may be serviceable to your friend, and without any injury to
yourself."

"Do not fear, father. And now I must pack up a few necessaries in my
bag, and be off to Mr. Brunton's. If I do not return home to-morrow, do
not be uneasy about me, and I will write to you every day to say how
things are going on."

When Hardy arrived at the house of Mr. Brunton, he found him, as he
anticipated, in a high state of nervous anxiety.

"I am so thankful you have arrived, Mr. Hardy," he said, shaking him
warmly by the hand: "and I need not tell you Mrs. Weston has been
waiting with great impatience to see you."

"Mrs. Weston! is she here?"

"Yes; not many minutes after you had left the office I called there, and
received the sad news about--about George. I at once telegraphed to Mrs.
Weston to come up to town, and it needed no urging to hasten her, for
she had only a short time before received a letter from him, which had
filled her with alarm. But let us go to her at once," said Mr. Brunton,
leading the way to the drawing-room; "she entreated I would bring you to
her the moment you arrived."

As Hardy entered, Mrs. Weston sprang to meet him.

"Have you found George?--where is he?" she asked, and the look of
struggling hope and despair was touching to witness.

"I have not found him, Mrs. Weston, but I know the place of his present
destination. He has gone to Plymouth;" and then Hardy briefly explained
the incidents of the morning.

"I cannot tell you how thankful I am to you, Mr. Hardy," said Mrs.
Weston, as he concluded. "May God bless you for your kindness to my pool
George!"

"George would have done more for me, Mrs. Weston," Hardy replied; "but,
at present, little or nothing has been done. Have you any plans, and can
I help you in them?"

"We must go on as soon as possible to Plymouth, and find out where he
is. He may perhaps be on the eve of starting away by some of the vessels
in the port. Not a minute should be lost."

"Then, sir, I will go down to Plymouth by the mail train which leaves in
about a couple of hours, if you will let me; and I promise you that I
will do my best to find him," said Hardy.

This unexpected proposition removed an infinite burden from Mr.
Brunton's mind. He felt that it was his duty to see Mr. Compton at once,
and he had other engagements which made it impossible for him to leave
that night. He did not like Mrs. Weston travelling alone, in her present
anxious and desponding state, and had been at his wit's end all day to
know how to manage.

"But, Mr. Hardy, can you go? Have you consulted your friends at home?
Can you manage to get leave of absence from the office?--remember they
will be short of hands there," asked Mr. Brunton.

"I have made all arrangements at home, sir and my only difficulty is
about Mr. Compton. But if you will please see him as soon as he returns,
and explain why I have left, I am sure he will not be displeased. He was
so fond of George, I know he would have said 'Go, by all means,' had he
been at home."

"I will undertake to set the matter right with him about you," said Mr.
Brunton; "but I doubt whether he will ever allow me to mention poor
George's name. Oh! Hardy, this is a sad, sad business!"

"It is, sir; but it is sadder for George than for his friends," replied
Hardy. "I cannot bear to think of the trouble he is passing through at
this moment. It has cost him much to take the step he has taken, and
everything must be done to get him back from his voluntary banishment"

"And everything shall be done that can," said Mr. Brunton. "God grant he
is still in England! I feel sure the sight of his mother and his friends
sorrowing for him, instead of turning against him as he supposes, will
alter his determination."

"Mr. Hardy, may I place myself under your protection until my brother
joins us at Plymouth?" said Mrs. Weston, abruptly. "I will go down by
the mail train to-night; I cannot rest until he is found."

Arrangements were speedily made, and that night the train bore off Mrs.
Western and Charles Hardy to Plymouth.

On the following morning Mr. Brunton called at Falcon-court. Mr. Compton
had not yet arrived, but was expected hourly. Not wishing to lose time,
which that morning was particularly precious to him, he asked for some
writing materials, and seating himself in Mr. Compton's room, intended
to occupy himself until his arrival. After he had been there about
half-an-hour, his attention was arrested by hearing the door of the
clerk's office open, and an inquiry made.

"Is Mr. George Weston here?"

"Mr. Weston has left the office," answered Williams, who came forward to
answer the inquiry. "Left yesterday morning."

"Indeed! Where has he gone to? why did he leave?"

"I don't think anyone knows where he has gone to," answered Williams;
"and I am not disposed to say why he left."

Williams did not know why he had left, nor were the circumstances of the
case known to any of the clerks; but many surmises had been made which
were unfavourable to him, and it was with the exultant pleasure a mean
spirit feels in a mean triumph, that Williams had at last an opportunity
of speaking lightly of the once good name of George Weston, to whom he
had ever cherished feelings of animosity.

"Is Mr. Compton in, or the manager?" asked the visitor. "I am
exceedingly anxious to know what has become of my friend."

"Between ourselves," said Williams, "the less you say about your friend
the better. It strikes me--mind, I merely give you this confidentially
as my impression--that, when Weston turns up again, his friends will not
be over-anxious to renew their acquaintance."

"What do you mean? I do not understand you."

"What I mean is this. When a clerk is dismissed from an office during
the absence of the principal, leaves suddenly and has to hide
himself--more particularly when accounts at the banker's do not quite
balance--one cannot help thinking there is a screw loose somewhere."

Mr. Brunton overheard all this; he who had never before heard an
unfavourable sentence spoken against his nephew. He had not fully
realised until that moment the painful position in which George's crime
had placed him, nor the depth of his nephew's fall in position and
character. He longed to have been able to stand up in vindication of
George against the terrible insinuations of Williams; he would have been
intensely thankful if he could have accosted the stranger, and said,
"That man is guilty of falsehood who dares to speak against the good
name of my nephew." But there he stood, with blood boiling and lips
quivering, unable to contradict one sentence that had been uttered.

"If Weston _does_ turn up," continued Williams, "will you leave any
message or letter, or your name, and it shall be forwarded?"

"My name is Ashton," said the stranger; "but it is unnecessary to say
that I called. It does not do to be mixed up with matters like these. I
half feared something of the sort was brewing, but I had no idea tilings
would have taken so sudden a turn."

Mr. Brunton could restrain his impatience no longer.

"Mr. Ashton," he said, coming suddenly upon the speakers, "will you
favour me by stepping inside a minute or two? I shall be glad to speak
to you."

Ashton was taken by surprise at seeing Mr. Brunton where he least
expected to see him.

"I have been placed in the uncomfortable position of a listener to your
conversation in the next room," said Mr. Brunton, closing the door; "and
I cannot allow those remarks made by the clerk with whom you were
talking to pass unqualified."

"They need little explanation, sir," said Ashton. "George Weston has
been on the verge of a catastrophe for some months, and I believe I can
fill in the outline of information which you heard given me."

"I am in ignorance of the causes which have led to my nephew's
disgrace," answered Mr. Brunton; "nor am I desirous to hear them from
any lips but his. You were one of his most intimate friends, I believe,
Mr. Ashton?"

"Yes; I think I may say his most intimate friend."

"And you knew he was on the 'verge of a catastrophe.' I have no doubt
you acted the part of a friend, and sought to turn his steps from the
fatal brink?"

"Well, as to that, he was fully competent to manage his own affairs
without my interference. I did tell him he would come to grief, if he
did not give up playing."

"And did you add to that advice that he should quit those associates
who had assisted to bring him to such a pass?"

"Certainly not; why should I meddle with him in his companionships? You
speak, Mr. Brunton, as if I were your nephew's keeper. If George Weston
liked to live beyond his means, he was at liberty to do it for me. I am
sorry he made such a smash at last, but it is all that could be
expected. If ever you see George again, sir, you will oblige me by
conveying one message. I did not think when he came to me, two nights
ago, to try and borrow a hundred pounds, that he intended to mix me up
in any disgraceful business like that of this morning. Had I known it,
instead of fretting myself about his welfare, he should have--"

"Made the discovery," interrupted Mr. Brunton, "that he never had a
friend in you. My idea of a friend is one who seeks the well-being of
another; speaks to him as a second conscience in temptation; loves with
a strength of attachment which cannot be broken; and, though sorrowing
over error, can still hope and pray for and seek to restore the erring.
Mr. Ashton, I do not wish to say more upon this matter; it is painful
for me to think how my nephew has been led downward, step after step, by
those whom he thought friends, and how sinfully he has yielded. When
you think of him, recollect him as the boy you knew at school, and try
to trace his course down to this day. You know his history, his
companionships, his whole life. Think whether _you_ have influenced it,
and how; and if your conscience should say, 'I have not been his
friend,' may you be led by the remembrance to consider that no man
liveth to himself: and that for those talents and attractions with which
you are endowed, you will have hereafter to give account, together with
the good or evil which has resulted from them."

To Ashton's relief the door opened, and Mr. Compton entered. Hastily
taking up his hat, he bade adieu to Mr. Brunton, glad of this
opportunity to beat a retreat.

"Confound those Methodists!" he uttered to himself, as he walked up
Fleet-street; "speak to them, they talk sermons; strike them, and they
defend themselves with sermons; cut them to the quick, and I believe
they would bleed sermons. But why should he pounce upon me? What have I
done? A pretty life George would have led if it hadn't been for me, and
this is all the thanks I get. I wish to goodness he had not made such a
fool of himself; I shall have to answer all inquiries about him, and it
is no honour to be linked in such associations."

The meeting between Mr. Compton and Mr. Brunton was one of mingled
feelings of pain and mortification. One had lost a valuable clerk, for
whom he cherished more than ordinary feelings of regard, and upon whom
he had hoped some day the whole management of the business would
devolve; the other had lost almost all that was dear to him on earth,
one whom he had watched, and loved, and worked for, and to whose bright
future he had looked forward with increasing pleasure, until it had
become a dream of life. Both were aggrieved, both were injured; but both
felt, in their degree, such strong feelings in favour of George, despite
his disgrace and crime, that they could look with more sorrow than anger
on the offender, and deal more in kindness than in wrath.

Mr. Compton could not but agree with Mr. Brunton that he must be
discovered, if possible; and although he could never receive him under
any circumstances into his office again, nor could ever have for him the
feelings he once entertained, still he felt free to adhere to his first
determination not to prosecute or take any steps in the case, nor allow
it to have more publicity than could be helped.

"He is still young," said he; "let him try to redeem the past. But it
is right he should feel the consequences of his actions, and no doubt he
will, as he has to encounter the difficulties which will meet him in
seeking to retrieve the position he has lost. You know me too well,
Brunton, to imagine that I do not estimate aright the extent of his
guilt; and you will give me credit for possessing a desire to do as I
would be done by in this case. I believe many a young man has been
ruined through time and eternity, by having been dealt with too
harshly--though in a legal sense quite justly; at the same time it has
been the only course to check a growing habit of crime in others. I know
well that in some instances it would be a duty to prosecute, if only as
a protection from suspicion of upright persons. But there are
exceptional cases, and I consider this to be one of them, although
perhaps many of our leading citizens might think me culpable in my
clemency; but I think I know your nephew sufficiently well to be
warranted in the belief that he feels his criminality, and will take a
lasting warning from this circumstance. And now, what do you intend to
do, since you know my determination?"

Mr. Brunton explained the plans he had formed, and the valuable
assistance which Hardy had rendered him. He was pleased to hear from his
injured friend the heartily expressed wish that the end in view might be
accomplished. Mr. Brunton had surmounted one great difficulty, and he
could not feel sufficiently thankful at the issue. Although he had known
Mr. Compton for many years, and had seen innumerable evidences of his
benevolence and good nature, he knew, too, that he was the very
personification of honesty and uprightness; and he dreaded lest,
incensed against George for his ingratitude, and fearing the influence
of his conduct might spread in the office, he would take measures
against him which, although perfectly just, would, by their severity,
prove deeply injurious in such a case, and reduce George, who was
naturally sensitive of shame, to a position from which he might never be
restored.

At the very earliest opportunity Mr. Brunton went down to Plymouth.
Business of the greatest importance, which he could not set aside, had
detained him in London until Friday, and his uneasiness had been
increased during that time by two notes he had received--one from Mrs.
Weston, and the other from Hardy--telling him of the unsuccessful issue
of their search. With an anxious heart he alighted at the station at
Plymouth, and walked to the hotel, where his sister and Hardy were
staying. The look of despair he read in Mrs. Weston's countenance, as
they met, told him that no favourable result had been obtained.

"We have been everywhere, and tried every possible plan to find poor
George," she said, when Mr. Brunton sat down beside her and Hardy to
hear the recital of their efforts. "I should have broken down long ago,
had it not been for our dear friend here, who has been night and day at
work, plotting schemes and working them out, and buoying me up with
hopes in their result. But I feel sure George cannot be in Plymouth, and
our search is vain."

"So Mrs. Weston has said all along," said Hardy; "but I cannot agree
with her; at all events, I will not believe it until we find out where
he has gone. He has not taken a passage in any of the vessels, as far as
we can ascertain; he is not in any of the inns in the town, I think, for
we have made the most searching inquiries at all of them; but in this
large place it is difficult to find any one without some positive clue."

"Have you been able to find out whether he really arrived here?" asked
Mr. Brunton.

"I think I have. One of the porters rather singularly recollected a
person, answering to the description, arriving by the train in which
George left London. It seems he was hastening away from the station
without giving up his ticket No doubt he was nervous and absent in mind;
and when the porter called to him, he started and seemed as if he were
alarmed: but in a minute he produced his ticket and went out The porter
looked suspiciously, I suppose, at the ticket, and evidently so at
George, for he was able to give a full description of him."

"That is so far satisfactory," said Mr. Brunton; "but have you made any
more discoveries to render you tolerably sure he is still in Plymouth."

"Yes, I have been to every shop where they fit out passengers for a sea
voyage, and have found out one where he purchased some articles of
clothing. But the clearest trace I have of him is from the shipping
agents. He was certainly looking over vessels on the morning after his
arrival here, for one or two captains have described him to me. I have
been a great many times down among the shipping, but have not made more
discoveries, and I cannot get any information from the shipping offices;
but in this you will probably meet with more success, sir, than I have,
for a young man is not of sufficient importance to command attention
from business men."

Mr. Brunton was fully conscious of the difficulties which were in the
way of finding George, even supposing he was still in Plymouth: but he
was not without hope. He could not find words enough to express his
strong approbation of all that Hardy had done, and he felt sure that he
could have no better assistant in the undertaking than he. A series of
plans were soon formed: Hardy was to keep watch upon those vessels which
he thought it probable George might choose, and offer rewards to sailors
and others for information. Mr. Brunton was to try and discover the
names and descriptions of passengers booked at the shipping offices; and
Mrs. Weston was to keep a general lookout on outfitters' warehouses, and
other places where it might be probable George would visit.

But every plan failed. Saturday night came, and, worn out with fatigue,
the anxious trio sat together to discuss the incidents of the day, and
propose fresh arrangements for the morrow. Sunday was not a day of rest
to them; from early morning they were all engaged in different
directions in prosecuting their search, and not until the curtain of
night was spread over the town, and the hum of traffic and din of bustle
had ceased, did they return to the hotel.

After supper, Mr. Brunton took out his pocket Bible, and read aloud some
favourite passages. They seemed to speak with a voice of hope and
comfort, and inspired fresh faith in the unerring providence of Him who
doeth all things well.

Very earnest were the prayers offered by that little party, as they
knelt together and commended the wanderer, wherever he might be, to the
care and guidance of the good providence of God. They felt how useless
were all plans and purposes unless directed by a higher source than
their own; and while they prayed for success upon the efforts put forth,
if in accordance with His will, they asked for strength and resignation
to bear disappointment Nor were their prayers merely that he whom they
were seeking might be found, but that he might find pardon and
acceptance with God, and that the evil which they lamented might, in the
infinitely wise purposes of Providence, be controlled for good.

With fresh zeal and renewed hope the three set forth on the following
morning to prosecute their several plans. Hardy had learned that one or
two vessels would sail that day, and he was full of expectation that he
might meet with some tidings.

Mr. Brunton felt rather unwell that morning--the press of business which
had detained him in London, the excitement of the journey, and the
fatigue of the previous days, had told upon his health. As he was
passing through a quiet part of the town, he called in at an
apothecary's to get a draught, which he hoped might ward off any serious
attack of sickness. While the draught was being prepared, Mr. Brunton,
who was intent upon his object and never left a stone unturned,
interrogated the apothecary, a gentlemanly and agreeable man, upon the
neighbourhood, the number of visitors in that locality, and other
subjects, ending by saying he was trying to discover the residence of a
relative, but without any knowledge of his address.

In the midst of the conversation, a servant-girl, without bonnet or
shawl, came hurriedly into the shop, out of breath with running.

"Oh, sir, if you please, sir, missus says, will you come at once to see
the young gentleman as stays at our house?--he's taken bad."

"Who is your mistress, my girl?" asked the chemist.

"Oh, sir, it's Mrs. Murdoch, of ---- Street; and the young gentleman is
a lodger from London, and he's going away to-morrow to the Indies or
somewheres; but do come, sir, please--missus'll be frightened to death,
all by herself, and him so dreadful bad."

Mr. Brunton had been an anxious listener. Was it possible that the young
gentleman from London could be George?

"How long has your lodger been with you?" he asked the girl.

"A week come Wednesday--leastways, come Tuesday night,"--was the
accurate answer.

Mr. Brunton, with eyes flashing with excitement, turned to the medical
man. "Will you allow me to accompany you on this visit?" he asked; "I
have reason to believe that your patient may be the relative for whom I
am searching."

"Then come, by all means," answered the doctor; and, preceded by the
girl, who was all impatience to get home, and kept up a pace which made
Mr. Brunton puff lustily, they reached the house of Mrs. Murdoch.




CHAPTER XI.

THE SICK CHAMBER.


The sun had gone down, and the twilight was fast losing itself in night.
The pale moon was struggling to look out upon the world through the
dark, heavy clouds which had collected around, as if expressly to
prevent this purpose. The hum of traffic in the street had ceased, and
the only sounds that came in at the open window were strains of music,
and the confused clamour of voices from a neighbouring tavern. The room
was a picture of neatness. The bed was draped in snowy furniture, and
the coverlid bore evidence of good taste and the ingenuity of
industrious hands. The mantlepiece was adorned with a few photographs
and a vase of fresh-gathered flowers.

Upon a table in the corner of the room stood a lamp, with a green shade
over it to screen the light from the bed. Beside it were bottles,
phials, and other appliances of a sick chamber.

A group stood round the bed, watching, with thrilling anxiety, the face
of the doctor as he held the inanimate hand of George Weston.

You might have heard the ticking of his watch as he stood there and
gazed in the face of the patient, while Mrs. Weston and Mr. Brunton and
Charles Hardy waited motionless, almost breathless, to hear his verdict.

"It is a more serious case than I imagined at first," said the doctor;
"I do not wish unnecessarily to alarm you, but it is my duty to say that
the condition of the patient is one of great danger, but I trust not
past recovery."

"What is the nature of the illness--tell me candidly?" asked Mr.
Brunton, when he could command speech.

"Brain fever," was the laconic answer.

For a long time George Weston lay in that awful state which is neither
death nor life--when the spirit seems to be hovering round the body,
uncertain whether to wing its flight for ever from the tenement of
earth, or return to sojourn still longer in its old familiar
dwelling-house. Sometimes he would rave in the frenzy of madness, and
then sink in exhaustion with scarcely the power to draw a breath.

Never was a sick-bed tended with greater care than his. Night after
night Mrs. Weston sat beside him, bathing the fevered head and cooling
the parched lips. Nor would she leave that post for a moment, until Mr.
Brunton was obliged to insist upon her taking rest.

"Reserve your strength," he said; "we know not what is before us; it may
be--but we have nothing to do with the future," he added, interrupting
himself; "that must be left in His hands."

Hardy was not able to remain in Plymouth longer than Wednesday. Mr.
Compton had written to him to say that, being short of hands, he was
very much pressed in business, and now that the main object of his
journey had been attained--for Mr. Brunton communicated with him almost
immediately--he should be glad if he would return as soon as possible.

As he stood beside the bed of George Weston on the morning of his
departure, and gazed into those pale and haggard features, which had
always beamed with a friendly smile for him, but which he might never
see again, he could not restrain the impulse of clasping his hand, and
uttering solemnly the prayerful wish, "God preserve and bless you,
George!"

The words were not heard by George--his ears were closed in dull
insensibility--but they were caught by Mr. Brunton and Mrs. Weston, who
that moment entered the room, and Hardy was startled to hear the earnest
response to his prayer in their united "Amen!"

"And that prayer shall ever be offered for you, Charles," said Mrs.
Weston; "I owe you a debt of gratitude which can never be repaid. I
shudder to think of what would have happened, had it not been for your
kind, noble, manly friendship. Poor George would have suffered in this
lonely place, away from all who loved him, and without proper care,
perhaps have died--died afoot."

"You do not know how thankful I feel, Mrs. Weston, that our efforts have
not been in vain. Pray write to me every day, to say how he is going
on--if it is only just one line; and should there be any change for
the--for the better, do let me know at once, that I may come down again,
if only for a day, just to congratulate him."

"And if there is another change--a change for the worse?" asked Mrs.
Weston, tearfully.

"Write, telegraph--pray let me know somehow," answered Hardy. "I could
not bear to part with him without telling and showing him there was one
of his old friends who loved him to the last. Good-bye, dear Mrs.
Weston; do not over-tax your strength, and keep up a good heart; depend
upon it, there are yet happy days for you and for George."

Mrs. Weston sadly missed her young friend after his departure. His
hopeful spirits had helped to buoy up her expectations and assuage the
sorrows of the present. It seemed as if the sun had hidden itself and
the stars had refused their light during those long days when the mother
sat watching at the bedside of her son. Mr. Brunton tried in every way
to relieve her, but his own heart was heavy, and the two felt more at
home in talking dolefully over the bad symptoms of the patient than in
looking forward to the future.

But a day came when the strength of the fever abated, and reason
returned to her long vacant throne.

It was toward evening: Mrs. Weston was sitting beside the bed, busily
stitching away at her work, and Mr. Brunton was resting his head upon
his hands as he turned over the pages of a book which he was trying to
deceive himself into the belief he was reading, when a deep sigh caused
them both to suspend their occupation.

George raised himself up in bed, and gazed round the room. The
furniture screened the two watchers, and he fancied himself alone. He
raised a pillow at his back, and reclining upon it in the placid calm of
exhaustion, with his face turned toward the open window, watched the
clouds as they crossed the blue expanse, and indulged in a half
conscious reverie. Where had he been? Where was he? Had he passed the
dark valley of the shadow of death, and were there angel forms in those
snow-white clouds beckoning him away? What was that confused sound which
rang in his ears? Was it the murmuring of the dark stream as it washed
upon the untrodden shore?

No: there was the little room where he had taken his lodgings; there was
the green paper on the wall with the large grape clusters; there was the
sound of human voices in the street And the consciousness that he was
alive, restored, flashed upon him with something of the bewildering
astonishment and joy which Lazarus must have felt when he heard the
words, "Come forth."

Too weak to rise, he was not too weak to pray. Clasping his hands
together, and gazing up into the clear blue sky, from whence all clouds
were now dispersing, he poured out his overflowing heart in
thanksgiving.

He spoke with God. The tremulous voice gained strength, the power of
faith and hope grew intensified, and he prayed with that love and
fervour which the grateful child of a heavenly Parent can only feel.

Mrs. Weston and Mr. Brunton were paralyzed with astonishment;
instinctively they shrank from disturbing that solemn time by coming
forward to speak with George and letting him recognise them; but with a
united impulse, both quietly and solemnly knelt down and joined in the
song of thanksgiving.

Theirs was joy unspeakable; tears poured down both faces, and hushed
sobs of rejoicing burst from their hearts. All their prayers and earnest
longings had been answered; all their sorrow was turned into joy; and
that Friend of friends, whose delights are with the children of men, had
ordered, according to the tender mercy of His loving heart, all the evil
into overwhelming good.

Presently the voice ceased; and, exhausted with the effort, George lay
down in calm and blissful tranquillity to sleep.

As Mrs. Weston rose from her knees, her dress touched a book on the
table, which fell to the ground. George was roused by the sound, and,
trying to draw aside the curtain, said,--

"Is that you, Mrs. Murdoch?"

Mrs. Weston, although dreading the consequences of excitement, could
restrain no longer the yearning of her motherly heart to embrace her
son.

"No, George, my dearest boy, it is your mother."

"Mother! mother!" cried George, with the old former-day voice of love
and joy, passionately kissing the face of beaming happiness bent over
him, "Thank God you are here!"

From that day George began rapidly to improve. The excitement produced
by the discovery that he had been sought and found, instead of doing him
injury, relieved his already-oppressed mind from a weight of care. Every
day brought fresh strength, and as he sat up in bed, carefully propped
up by pillows, with his uncle on one hand and his mother on the other,
he told them all the sorrowful and joyful details of his strange
experiences until the eventful morning when his strength gave way.

"This is beginning life afresh, in every sense," he said; "here am I, a
poor mortal, almost helpless, just strong enough to know how weak I am;
and before me--if my life is spared--lies an untrodden path. But I begin
my restored life, through God's infinite mercy, with a new inner life;
and He who has given me that, will, I know, freely give me all things
that shall be for my good."

Mrs. Weston never knew the fulness of joy before those days. Her only
son, in whom all her brightest earthly hopes were centred, had ever been
a source of deep anxiety to her. Her never-ceasing prayer had been that
he might be what he now was--a child of her Father; and in the
realization of her heart's desire she found such joy unspeakable, that
all the cares and troubles of long, weary years seemed as though they
had not been.

George was soon sufficiently restored to be able to leave his bed and
sit up for a few hours on the sofa. The day for this trial of strength
having been definitely fixed by the doctor, Mrs. Weston wrote at once to
Hardy, inviting him, if he could manage to get away, to come down and
celebrate the event.

The meeting between the two friends was as joyful as their parting had
been sorrowful.

"George, my dear old boy," said Hardy, as he shook him by the hand, "it
does my eyesight good to see you again."

"And it does my heart good to see you, old fellow," replied George, as
he returned the pressure. "You don't know how I have longed for your
coming, that I might tell you how deeply grateful I am to you for all
your brotherly love--"

"Good-bye, George," said Hardy, taking up his hat and buttoning his
coat; "I won't stay another minute unless you give over talking such
stuff What I've done! Why, if my pup, Gip, were to run away, I should do
for him what I have done for you--no more, no less. So let us drop the
subject, that's a good fellow, and then I'll sit down and chat with
you."

Never was there a pleasanter chat by any little party than by that which
assembled in Mrs. Murdoch's best parlour that evening. All hearts were
full of thankfulness, and though there were some painful subjects
discussed, yet the joyful ones far more than counterbalanced them.

Mr. Brunton found out, in the course of the evening, that he had
something very important to do, and probably Mrs. Weston discovered her
assistance was needed as well, for the friends found themselves, after a
while, alone, which was what they both wanted.

"You have heard, Hardy, of all the strange things that have happened to
me?" George began, hesitatingly. "I should like to be able to tell you
all about them; but, somehow, I don't know how to put such matters into
words."

"You mean, George, that one great, solemn, joyful event which has made
your life now something worth living for," said Hardy, relieving him of
a difficulty. "I cannot tell you how glad I am to know it. The past two
years have been funny ones to both of us. Religion has been ground on
which we have not been able to tread together, as you know: but, thank
goodness, that has all gone by. Now, I must tell you my mind, George,"
he continued, in that frank, manly way which was so natural to him; "I
never gave you credit for sincerity when you took up with those strange
notions which were so dangerous to you. I believed then that they were
convenient principles, which might be stretched and made to agree with
the dictates of your inclination. I do not say you did not believe what
you professed, but I always thought that you forced yourself into that
belief by self-deception. Now, wait, don't interrupt me. I know what you
are going to say; but whatever harm you did to others--God only knows
that--I do not think your change in sentiment did any harm to me! For
this reason--I saw you were not straightforward with your own heart, and
I felt sure you slighted that pure and holy religion in which we had
been instructed from childhood, not because in your heart of hearts you
disbelieved it, but because it condemned that course of conduct which
you were pursuing. Now, was it not so?"

"Yes, Hardy, you are right. I can trace out now the processes of thought
through which I passed, to lead me to think and act as I did; and I
never knew before what a wretchedly poor thing a morally endowed,
intelligent human being is in his own strength. I did not know how weak
I was. I did feel sometimes oppressed with the idea that I was willingly
blindfolding myself--but, somehow, an argument was always at hand to
weigh down this feeling. But tell me why you think my endeavours to make
you believe as I did never did you injury? God grant they may not to
others."

"Why, when I observed you, as I tell you I did, it was impossible for me
not to be on my guard. Nay, more, this question tormented me daily, 'You
believe George disregards religion, because it condemns him; if you
regard that religion, but do not practise it, does it not condemn you?'
Now this was a home-thrust, George, which I could not parry off. I tried
to determine not to be such a cowardly, mean-spirited creature as to try
and cheat God by pretending to believe Him, and yet fight under false
colours against Him; and so I gave up many of my old habits, and tried
to start afresh. And now, George, you don't know how thankful I am that
you are different to what you were. We have studied many things
together, joined in many plans and purposes; and now I hope we shall be
able to study the highest and best thing in earth or heaven--what God's
will is, and how to do it."

       *       *       *       *       *

That desire became the watchword of their lives.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Life in London, by Edwin Hodder

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIFE IN LONDON ***

***** This file should be named 9940.txt or 9940.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/9/4/9940/

Produced by Kevin Handy, Dave Maddock, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
